![](images/cover.jpg)

[]{#cover.xml}

![Cover Image](images/cover.jpg){style="height:100%"}

[]{#titlepage.html}

::: body
Mother Earth News\
1991
:::

[]{#toc.html}

::: body
# Contents {.toc-title}

[August/September 1991](#part001.html)

[Historic Quotes: The Best of 20 Years Ago Today](#chapter001.html)

[Cemetery Maintenance Controversy, Recycled Missle Silos, and Other News
Items](#chapter002.html)

[Alaska's Fiddlehead Restaurant: Barters and
Bootstraps](#chapter003.html)

[Firewood Cover, Homemade Sawmill, and Other Country
Lore](#chapter004.html)

[Coping With Flea and Tick Season - and Other Pet Health
Issues](#chapter005.html)

[American Farm Food](#chapter006.html)

[Weather Forecasting](#chapter007.html)

[Fantasy Solar Cabin](#chapter008.html)

[Wilderness Living in British Columbia](#chapter009.html)

[Robyn Van En: The First Lady of Community Supported
Agriculture](#chapter010.html)

[Your Basic Tool Kit](#chapter011.html)

[Three Essential Power Tools](#chapter012.html)

[The Fundamentals of Root Cellaring](#chapter013.html)

[A Natural Playground](#chapter014.html)

[Know Your Community](#chapter015.html)

[Bathroom Compost Box: It's Not For Everyone](#chapter016.html)

[Making Compost and Using It](#chapter017.html)

[Growing Conifer Trees From Seed](#chapter018.html)

[October/November 1991](#part002.html)

[Mushroom Foraging In The Fall](#chapter019.html)

[Woodstove Warning, Food Consumption, Green Investments And More Bits
And Pieces](#chapter020.html)

[Kitchen Notes](#chapter021.html)

[Pet Advice For The Modern Homestead](#chapter022.html)

[How To Make A Fall Wreath](#chapter023.html)

[Earthship Homes: Affordable, Energy-Efficient
Building](#chapter024.html)

[How To Build A Dry Stone Wall](#chapter025.html)

[The Perfect Apple Pie](#chapter026.html)

[How To Tell A Story Well](#chapter027.html)

[Fall Mulching](#chapter028.html)

[Log Home Insulation Saves Energy](#chapter029.html)

[Quick Checks For An Efficient, Winterized Heating
System](#chapter030.html)

[Take Your Shop Workbench With You](#chapter031.html)

[Make A Cherry Pit Heating Pad](#chapter032.html)

[Styrofoam Puffy Pillows, Can Milk At Home And More](#chapter033.html)

[I Hate My Old Tractor!](#chapter034.html)

[Different Types Of Weatherstripping And How To Weatherstrip Your
Home](#chapter035.html)

[Types Of Caulk And Where To Seal Leaks](#chapter036.html)

[Oil Burner Tune Up](#chapter037.html)

[Insulating Pipes And Heating Ducts](#chapter038.html)

[Energy Saving Guide For Winter Quiz](#chapter039.html)

[December 1991/January 1992](#part003.html)

[Country Lore: Ideas For Reusing Junk Mail, Candle Wax And
More](#chapter040.html)

[How To Build A Toy Box](#chapter041.html)

[Soup Secrets From Betty Spierling](#chapter042.html)

[Advice From A Farm Vet On Caring For Livestock Animals In
Winter](#chapter043.html)

[Finding And Fixing An Old-Time Fiddle](#chapter044.html)

[Uncle Billy'S Salt-Cured Hams](#chapter045.html)

[Historical Heirloom Gardening With Ornamental Plants](#chapter046.html)

[Axe Sharpening And Maintenance](#chapter047.html)

[Winter Mulching](#chapter048.html)

[How To Make A Natural Garland For The Holidays](#chapter049.html)

[Make Your Own Potpourri For Luscious Homemade Christmas
Gifts](#chapter050.html)

[Have A Green Christmas: Live Christmas Trees](#chapter051.html)

[Kid-Approved Earth-Friendly Toys](#chapter052.html)

[Turn Meat Scraps Into Christmas Candles](#chapter053.html)

[Modern Wood Stoves](#chapter054.html)

[How To Build A Fire In A Woodstove](#chapter055.html)

[Wood Stove Cooking](#chapter056.html)

[Bald Eagle Watching In Sauk-Prairie, Wis.](#chapter057.html)

[Four-Wheel Fun](#chapter058.html)

[Lessons Of Cutting Wood](#chapter059.html)
:::

[]{#part001.html}

::: body
![art](images/1991-08-01.jpg)
:::

[]{#chapter001.html}

::: body
# [Historic Quotes: The Best of 20 Years Ago Today](#toc.html#chap-1) {.chapter-title}

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**August/September 1991**

Issue \# 127 - August/September 1991

"It is no longer possible for non-Indians to believe in progress. After
over-consumption, over-population and over-complications of life, you
will have to turn to the Indian way of looking at things. Your way of
life has gone about as far as it can and give you meaning."\

-Vine Deloria, Jr, Native American

"We all live on the spaceship Earth-and the nearest gas station is about
93 million miles away."

-Buckminster Fuller

"I don't think there's any question about it. If we had invested the
incredible amounts of money in solar energy research that we've
squandered over the past 20 or 25 years in an attempt to make atomic
power work, we'd be using the sun to supply a substantial amount of our
energy requirements right now."

\- Ralph Nader

"The good life depends upon intimacy and small number."

-Aristotle

"Thousands of tired, nerve-shaken, over-civilized people are beginning
to find out that going to the mountains is going home; that wilderness
is a necessity; and that mountain parks and reservations are useful not
only as foundations of timber and irrigating rivers, but as fountains of
life."

-John Muir

"The warnings are not heard. If heard, they are not believed. If
believed, they are not thought to apply to the believer."

-An unidentified writer\
in the London Times

Since the beginning of time each generation has fought nature. Now in
the life span of a single generation, we must turn and become the
protector of nature."

-Jacques Cousteau

Man has lost the capacity to foresee and to forestall. He will end by
destroying the earth."

-Albert Schweitzer

"The people in the United States do not have the happiness that comes
from drinking good natural water. Instead, they drink dilute sewage
containing chlorine and organic and industrial contaminants. They
breathe air contaminated with oxides of nitrogen and sulfur, with
hydrocarbons and aldehydes, with lead and carbon monoxide and soot. The
quality of food continues to deteriorate."

-Linus Pauling

Nobel Prizewinner

"There is more to life than increasing its speed.

-Gandhi

"The white man knows how to make everything ...but he does not know how
to distribute it."

-Sitting Bull, after giving what money he had to a group of ragged,
hungry white boys

The question is not whether \[population growth\] will stop. The
question is when and how."

-Isaac Asimov

"Petroleum has become as much the drug of Western civilization as
cigarettes and alcohol."

Leonard Mosley

"Fission energy is safe only if a number of critical devices work as
they should, if a number of people in key positions follow all their
instructions, if there is no sabotage, no hijacking of the transports,
if no reactor fuel processing plant or reprocessing plant or repository
anywhere in the world is situated in a region of riots or guerilla
activity and no revolution or war-even a \`conven tional one'-take space
in these regions. No acts of God can be permitted."

-Dr. Hannes Alfven\
Nobel Prizewinner

"Inasmuch as man and his influence on his world is now so total, we
actually have entered into a new phase of history. The consequences of
man's abuse of his own life support state, his planet, are immediately
felt. And as the environment becomes more seriously damaged, the
consequences of further abuse will all-the-more-rapidly become
apparent."

-Ron Cobb

"This world is given to us on loan. We come and we go, and, after a
time, we leave earth and air and water to others who come after us. My
generation-or perhaps the one preceding mine-has been the first to
engage, under the leadership of the exact sciences, in a destructive
colonial warfare against nature. The future will curse us for it."

-Erwin Chargaff

"In former days, men sold themselves to the Devil to acquire magical
powers. Nowadays they acquire these powers from science, and find
themselves compelled to become devils."

-Bertrand Russell

The world's being run by \[people\] who really take no responsibility
for future generations. And in this day and age, with science as it is,
we have to be responsible or we won't survive."

-Dr. Helen Caldicott

"Which would you rather have? The earth as it was in 1500-before the Age
of Science-with its natural forests, clear streams, virgin soils, and
precious metals intact? Or the earth as it is now ... covered with
stumps, foul streams, eroded soils, and left with a depleted store of
precious metals?"

-Walter Prescott Webb
:::

[]{#chapter002.html}

::: body
# [Cemetery Maintenance Controversy, Recycled Missle Silos, and Other News Items](#toc.html#chap-2) {.chapter-title}

**New England town manager gets in trouble for employing sheep to keep
cemetery tidy and mistaking migrating insects for spacecraft.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**August/September 1991**

Bits and Pieces

News from the field: Killer bees, missile silos, and sonic suds

ORWELL, VERMONT, TOWN MANAGER NOEL Smith had a problem one day last
spring: How to keep the town's cemetery tidy while keeping within his
budget. After receiving proposals from several landscaping companies
(average tab for the summer would run \$3,000 for the men and their
machines), Smith hired his low bidder. For a mere \$250, Jean Beck
promised a 2 1/2" trim and ideal employees: They didn't mind working in
the abundant poison ivy, never took coffee breaks, and not only bagged
grass clippings, they ran on them. Knowing she sounded too good to be
true, Beck sheepishly confessed that her employees were, well, sheep.
Seventeen Dorset sheep to be exact. Saving the city a bundle, Beck
agreed to shepherd the ovine groundskeepers between the town's two
cemeteries, charging only \$10 an hour for the commute. And as for the
sheep, their only request was a barrel of water and the
all-they-could-eat burdock buffet, making them quite a baaargin.

His problem solved, Smith went home happy. Enter in 43 Orwell residents.
Seems some folks didn't fancy Smith's four-footed foliage fighters and
deemed the Dorsets "disrespectful." A petition circulated, gathering
over 136 signatures, and a town hall protest attracted 20 objectors.

Although Smith was taken aback by the protest, he didn't expect things
to turn ugly: "First there was an incident where the fencing around the
sheep got cut, allowing them to escape to the road." Then the threats
began. Seems the more militant of the protestors ordered a hit on the
sheep and Smith received anonymous calls telling him that, in no
uncertain terms, a gunman was about to set his sights on the cemetery.
The town selectmen called a special vote and fired the sheep before the
sheep were fired upon.

By the time the dust settled, the tiny town and its Dorset denizens had
attracted so much national attention that owner Beck commissioned
T-shirts supporting her mowing mammals. The 100% cotton T-shirt shows a
photo of the sheep grazing on the front; the back boasts the battle cry
"Let the Sheep Eat in Peace." They are available in medium, large, extra
large, and extra-extra large. Send \$15 (cost includes all postage and
handling) to Sheep T-shirt c/o Jean Beck P.O. Box 103, Orwell, VT 05760.
Two dollars from every sale is donated to a group doing cemetery
preservation work.

Who is mowing now that the plots have thickened and the sheep have been
shorn from duty? "Some of the protestors have been told to take charge
of clipping," reports Smith.

And for the sheep? They are resting in peace back with owner Jean Beck.

### Recycled Silos {.level3}

Time was when a silo had a strictly agricultural purpose. Then, in the
early \`60s, the military appropriated the word (and the engineering)
for its own nasty intentions. In 1962, at the height of the Cuban
missile crisis, it constructed 12 concrete-lined underground silos-each
up to 174 feet deep and 52 feet in diameter-at strategic sites across
upper New York State and northwestern Vermont, fitted each silo with an
Atlas missile, and then tilted the doomsday devices toward the Commie
nemesis 6,000 miles away. Three years later, America's bionic missile
establishment produced the Titan missile, rendering the Atlases, and
their comfy silos, obsolete. For the past 25 years the silos have housed
nothing but stagnant water.

Last fall, a nonprofit New York gallery, The Storefront for Art and
Architecture, sought practical suggestions for recycling the underground
structures, and got some. Included in the schemes were plans for
transforming the silos into poetry libraries, parking garages, giant
musical instruments, incarceration tanks for belligerent world leaders,
chapels, solar-powered plants, and cesspools. The most off-the-wall plan
called for linking the 12 sites in a "Nuclear Heritage Park" that would
display weapons systems from around the world, offer visitors missile
rides with a "spectacular splashdown in Lake Champlain," and feature a
nightclub replica of the Pentagon's war room.

The more prosaic plans called for turning the silos into hydroponic
gardens and mushroom farms-which, in addition to their simplistic
beauty, would liberate the use of the word silo from the military once
and for all.

### The Mother of All Catalogs {.level3}

For all you catalog collectors-and we know you're legion-something on
the order of a dream: the second annual *National Directory of
Catalogs.* The catalog of all catalogs, literally, this 700-page tome
costs \$195 (mention MOTHER and you'll receive it at the introductory
price of \$145) and lists over 7,000 catalogs in the United States and
Canada. From API Outdoors Inc. ("America's leader in tree-stand
technology") to Zen Home Stitchery (custom-made meditation clothing),
this edition covers everything from mom-and-pop speciality houses to
industrial biggies offering apparel and accessories to gardening
supplies, hardware, and sporting goods.

As if that's not enough, the publisher is even offering a free 30-day
examination of the book. For further information, write: The National
Directory of Catalogs, 150 Fifth Ave., Suite 302, New York, NY 10011; or
call (212) 741-0231, ext. 203.

And if you're interested in maximizing your tax dollars, order the
*Consumer's Resource Handbook* from the U.S. Office of Consumer Affairs.
It tells you how to solve just about any consumer problem, from getting
warranties honored to finding a dealer to service your vacuum cleaner.
The handbook is free, and when you order one the Feds throw in a copy of
the *Consumer Information Catalog,* which lists about 200 free and
low-cost consumer publications available from the United States
government. Order from: Handbook, Consumer Information Center, Pueblo,
CO 81009.

### Paint, We Thought We Knew Ya {.level3}

The worst stage of any home-improvement job, some of us here would
argue, is painting and the Department of Health and Human Services would
agree. Though lead is no longer allowed in paint, it still poses a
danger to children who eat old lead-paint chips or to people who sand
lead-painted walls in a poorly ventilated space.

And now the Environmental Protection Agency has done its part for good
excuses to put off painting projects: An investigation revealed
potentially hazardous levels of mercury present in paint. The mercury
question became of such concern that the EPA banned its use as a
preservative in outdoor latex without even completing the study. One
year ago the EPA ordered manufactures to take the toxin out of interior
latex after a four-year-old Michigan boy

suffered from mercury poisoning after 17 gallons of paint containing
excessive quantities of mercury were applied to the inside of his
parents' home when the windows were closed. Previously, neither the
presence nor the concentration of mercury in latex paint was required to
be labeled on the can. By the end of September 1991, all paint dealers
must mark cans containing mercury, but for the moment, they are allowed
to sell tainted leftover batches. Wise advice from the EPA's A1 Heier:
"Check the label for mercury and then ask your supplier when the can
came in." Studies are now underway to check the occupational hazards
posed to housepainters and possible ground-water contamination from
years of mercury-painted home runoff. Yikes.

### And What Have You Done Lately? {.level3}

Each U.S. farmer now provides 128 people with food and fiber-up from 123
a year ago. That includes 94 people in the United States and 34 abroad.

### UFOs May Be Bugging You {.level3}

That alien spacecraft you and your friends witnessed hovering just
beyond the pond this summer might actually have been a vast swarm of
nocturnal migrating insects, says Dr. Phillip Callahan, a biophysicist.
Callahan hit on his theory after he placed insects in an electrical
field and discovered that they emitted a visible light, called a corona
discharge.

Many insects species migrate after dusk, often riding the winds of a
storm front, which has the electrical conditions to make the insects
glow eerily in the night sky.

The shape of an insect swarm also seems to fit the popular configuration
of a UFO.

According to Callahan, insect swarms emit luminous blue, green, and
yellow light, adding to the extraterrestrial aura of their flight. In
one test, he checked the migration of moths in Utah against UFO
sightings. "There was a perfect match in place and time between the UFO
sightings and the migration of spruce budworm moths," says Callahan.
"I'm convinced that a lot of night sightings are just lit-up insects
riding storm fronts."

### Prairie Home Companion {.level3}

Ten years ago, you painted the kitchen a sort of peach color. It was
called something like Heather's Mist, or maybe, Baby's Breath, or
...whatever. Anyway, you like the color and would like to duplicate it.
The whole job took about four gallons, or was it six? You know you did
the job 10 years ago because it was right after you replaced the burner
in your furnace, and the burner only lasts about 10 years, if you
remember correctly. Meaning, it's about time to replace the burner. Or
is it?

Keeping track of home maintenance can be a full-time job, and now
there's a diary to help you. *The Home Owner's Journal: What 1 Did &
When I Did It* is a great organizational tool for recording all those
details about home improvement and maintenance you're happy to forget
about after the job is done. The book, which uses a simple
fill-in-the-blank format, contains a chapter for every room in the
house, as well as for the deck and patio, cooling and heating units, and
garage and driveway. It's available for \$9.95 plus \$2 shipping from
Blue Sky Marketing, PO. Box 21583-176, St. Paul, MN 55121; 800-444-5450.

### Fill It Up-Ivory {.level3}

Talk about cleaning power. Last year Northwest Airlines grounded a dozen
of its DC-9s after a mechanic serving one of the jets noticed the
hydraulic fluid had a strange texture. It turns out the planes had b een
flying for 10 days with a mixture of hand soap and hydraulic fluid in
the hydraulic system. No reports on what was being dispensed in the
cabin lavatories.

**"This 'killer bee' thing is a creation of the popular press."**\

### Revenge of the Killer Bees {.level3}

They came in the night, buzzing like a swarm of chain saws over the
torpid water of the Rio Grande, while a defenseless America slept,
unaware that one of the most horrifying films of the \`70s was about to
become real life: Killer bees had finally arrived! But sleeping,
according to one expert, was an entirely appropriate reaction.

"This \`killer bee' thing is a creation of the popular press," says
Roger Morse, professor of agriculture at Cornell University. "It's all a
great big humbug." Dr. Morse, who has worked with the bees in Africa and
Brazil, says that they are slightly more aggressive than European
breeds, but are good pollinators, good honey-makers, and best of all,
they are resistant to many diseases that now plague apiaries in the
United States.

The first Africanized bees were trapped last October in Hidalgo, Texas,
a small border town in the lower Rio Grande Valley. Researchers at the
USDA's Honey Bee Research Laboratory in nearby Weslaco had been
expecting the bees since a swarm was trapped 150 miles south of
Brownsville, in the northern Mexico border state of Tamaulipas, in 1989.
The bees have been moving northward since they escaped from a breeding
experiment in Brazil in 1957. Their tendency to attack en masse when
threatened earned them the nickname "killer bees," and several hundred
people in Central and South America have reportedly died from these
attacks.

Morse downplays the danger and says that beekeepers can work with
Africanized bees if they follow a few precautions: Give the bees plenty
of room in the hives, adding supers (upper stories) before the nectar
begins to flow; use larger smokers and don p rotective clothing before
entering the apiary; and use care in selecting the apiary site.

"They're basically good bees," Morse says. "The Brazilians are getting
more honey now than ever."\

**Revenge of the Killer Bees II\
\
**

John Reeves, an amateur beekeeper and a diabetic, was sitting in a chair
at his Tennessee home, watching his bees when he had an insulin reaction
and kicked the hive.

About 1,000 bees swarmed him and "covered him from head to toe, said
Assistant Fire Chief Gordon Lane, who lead a rescue effort of
firefighters wearing aluminum gear. Nursing supervisor Pat Hollifield,
of North Side Hospital in Johnson City, Tennessee, called Reeves lucky
to be alive. His face was white with stingers. A team of hospital
workers plucked stingers for three hours. He vomited quite a few. One
came out of his ear when they brought him in, said nurse Brenda Egan.

Reeves, 66, spent weeks in intensive care. His wife, Elise, called the
attack "a nightmare" but said that Reeves, an amateur beekeeper for over
15 years, intends to keep his bees.\
\
*Do you have interesting, informative, or timely news from the field
you'd like to share with otherMOTHER readers? Please send your newspaper
clippings, press releases, photos, or true tales to "Bits & Pieces, "
MOTHER EARTH NEWS, P.O.* Box 129, Arden, North Carolina 28704.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71352-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix001.html#a71352-0)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71352-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix001.html#a71352-1)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71352-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix001.html#a71352-2)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71352-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix001.html#a71352-3)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71352-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix001.html#a71352-4)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71352-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix001.html#a71352-5)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter003.html}

::: body
# [Alaska's Fiddlehead Restaurant: Barters and Bootstraps](#toc.html#chap-3) {.chapter-title}

**Organic farmers start business and involve employees in decision
making process.**

**By Karen Bokram**

**August/September 1991**

WHEN DEBORAH MARSHALL CAME to Anchorage, in 1974, with sister, Lydia,
and a musician from New York named Scott Miller, she was looking for
bluer skies and taller mountains; a sense of spirit and purpose. What
she found was mooseburgers. Seeing a chance to shape her future, to
contribute to her community and new home, and to eat a creature smaller
than her car, Deb and her band of modern pioneers came out of the cold
and into the kitchen.

Her first restaurant, The Bread Factory, made soup, bread, and a small
pile of money. Armed with the knowledge of what it takes to make it in
the restaurant business ("a constantly replenishing stock of creativity,
love, energy, and compassion," says Deb), she headed southeast to
Juneau. That was 1978 and the restaurant was the Fiddlehead Restaurant
and Bakery. Thirteen years later, Deb hasn't left either.

What she did leave behind were a lot of the "everybody-is-equal"
management techniques she acquired from years in a collective selling
organic produce. Deb exchanged that for a happy blend of
employee-orientated management and benefits combined with top-down
leadership. The result? A company with a conscience and an effective
operating plan.

In the beginning, Deb approached her restaurant with much the same
attitude as in her collective days. "We made all the decisions together.
Not just the owners but the staff. If we were debating whether or not to
put steak on the menu, everyone sat down and talked about it. When the
discussion ended, it was two years later."

As business blossomed and the competition stiffened ("we were the only
game in town for the first four or five years," says Deb), the
Fiddlehead had to outgrow the "collective" style of management. "Group
decision-making just wasn't effective. We needed to move quicker than
our organization was able to. We needed a change."

The change became conscientious decision-making within a traditional
corporate structure. Now there is a team of four that decides Fiddlehead
policy: Deb, representing management; a chef, representing the kitchen;
a personnel manager speaking for the wait staff; and an operations
manager, reminding everyone of the bottom line.

Interestingly, Deb sees the same kind of change happening in the
collectives: "Even though the ideals have remained intact, a lot of
these organizations are finding that traditional top-down management is
essential to their survival. You have to be re sponsive, be able to
react to the market." Which isn't to say that Deb has shifted away from
her most valuable resource, her employees. "I want to involve people. If
the interest is there, our people can go as far as they want." On the
flip side, Deb has also come to another realization that has changed her
style. "Not everyone wants to be owner, not everyone wants to be
involved. There are just people who want to punch in, punch out, and
leave work behind," she says.

A few of the old employee-management principles did stay with her,
though. In keeping with her old ideals, Deb provides benefits that are
unheard of throughout most of the restaurant industry: health care
plans, retirement programs, a savings program, and profit sharing. Deb
is proud that she can provide 45 excellent jobs for Alaskans. "People
can support families when they work here," she says. Deb has even
started a food co-op for Fiddlehead employees: Once a month employees
can order items in bulk and pay cost, saving a considerable amount over
other Alaskans who must tolerate the high prices for ferried fresh
produce.

The same quality Deb gives her employees, she also gives her customers.
Everything at the Fiddlehead is prepared with the freshest ingredients
the sea and land have to offer, prepared as naturally and healthfully as
possible. The restaurant firmly believes in organic ingredients,
recycling, and buying products from socially responsible companies. With
so much care and attention, can virtue pay off? Deb laughs at this
question. "We haven't shown a profit in quite a few years. A 3 or 4%
profit is a great year; 2% is our goal."

But this commitment to quality does have the more than 100,000 customers
coming back, some who dine up to 10 times a week. "I believe that after
15 years, the market can taste the difference. Most people don't realize
that we use organic flours. We even make our own hamburger buns. It
costs us more but I think people really enjoy the result."

The search for the highest-quality ingred ients that will keep customers
coming back has led Deb to an innovative way to secure the freshest
produce specialities, such as rhubarb. "We found that our suppliers just
weren't doing enough business off us. So we decided to lease a plot of
land and hire farmers to plant on our behalf. That way there is no risk
to them and we get the quality of produce we want."

The Fiddlehead's long-standing reputation for wonderful food led Deb and
her team down two new paths recently: One, the addition of a second
floor to the restaurant ("a big investment in our future," says Deb),
and two, the first Fiddlehead cookbook.

Written with Nancy and John DeCherney, two Culinary Institute of America
grads who now oversee the Fiddlehead kitchen, and Susan Brook, a writer
and fanner, *The Fiddlehead Cookbook is* an homage to the cuisine and
characters that have made the Fiddlehead such a success. Expect to find
their recipes for robust soups and sandwiches; light and healthy
vegetarian and seafood pastas; grilled meats and stirfries; sauces and
salsas; and sourdough breads and muffins. Also featured are wonderful
desserts (espresso-chocolate cheesecake, Fiddlehead brownies, and
orange-wine cake to name a few), as well as their own, very unique local
creations: Fiddlehead pesto sauce (made with the regional fiddlehead
fems) and Halibut Nicoise are but two.

And, no, not one mooseburger recipe in the bunch.

*The Fiddlehead Restaurant and Bakery (907/586-3150) is at 429 West
Willoughby Avenue, Juneau, AK 99801.*

### Deb Marshall's Factory Worker Sandwich {.level3}

*12 slices hearty bread (Deb recommends her sunflower-millet bread)\
3 cups guacomole\
12 tomato slices (2 large tomatoes)\
6 slices (6 ounces) Cheddar cheese\
6 slices (6 ounces) Jack cheese\
6 tablespoons roasted sunflower seeds\
6 tablespoons alfalfa sprouts*

1\. Preheat broiler.\
2. Spread each slice of bread with 1/4 cup guacamole and place on a
cookie sheet.\
3. Lay 1 slice of cheddar on each of 6 slices of bread, 1 slice of Jack
on each of the remaining slices, and *place* under broiler.\
4. When cheese has melted, remove from heat, top each piece of bread
with a slice of tomato, and put seeds on the 6 slices with the cheddar
cheese, sprouts on the 6 with Jack.\
5. Transfer to a serving platter and serve open-faced, giving each
person a slice with Cheddar and one with Jack cheese.

Preparation and cooking time: 30 minutes, including preparing the
guacamole.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71354-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix002.html#a71354-0)

Deborah Mar shall (left) with fellow\
Fiddle headers Susan Brook, Nancy\
DeCherney, and John DeCherney.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71354-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix002.html#a71354-1)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter004.html}

::: body
# [Firewood Cover, Homemade Sawmill, and Other Country Lore](#toc.html#chap-4) {.chapter-title}

**Mildred Baughman carries leaf mold and soil from the nearby woods to
create a fertile growing environment; A.M. Rader puts a rubber crutch
tip over his hammer head so as not to dent wood; Raymond Wilcox uses
stair runners to cover his wood pile; Pete Peterson built a mill so he
could construct his log cabin; Eileen Janigo places kindling in a paper
bag and lights it to start fires; Ann Hourdequin uses sauerkraut to
clean the insides of porcelain teapots; Jack Kiser checks musical
greeting cards and recycles their batteries in his watch; R.C.W. Davis
shares a recipe for homemade peanut butter; Andrew Guskea protects knife
blades with hosing; Ross Westergaard uses freezer packs to keep the
refrigerator cool; Lorna Ternyila rubs her hands in vegetable oil before
washing to remove oil and grime; Mikki Smith shares recipes for wet
wipes and pet shampoo; Theresa Thompson puts a cough drop in tea to
clear her head when sick; Ken Dillard boils persimmon twigs to treat
poison ivy; Cheryl Miller stretches hat bills over pots to keep their
shape; James Richards sharpens knives with tool steel; Carmen Wright
uses a mild tea to clean hardwood floors; Renee Shermen pinches her
upper lip to relieve leg cramps; Nita Brainard soaks clothes in cold
saltwater to remove the game smell after hunting; Jeff Mullin uses ashes
to clean stove glass doors; Claudia Morgan recommends not heating PVC
pipe; Janelle Myers suggests leaving a window cracked when burning
candles in a snowbound car; Kelly Bastin tells that windshield washer
fluid has toxins that are harmful for pets and humans and should not be
used as household cleaner.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} readers**

**August/September 1991**

### Backpack Gardening {.level3}

How can anyone have a successful garden at an altitude of 7,000 feet on
a small mobile home lot, especially when the topsoil has been scooped
off by the developer? We did it by backpacking rich leaf mold and soil
in from nearby woods.

We live on the edge of a pine forest that has clumps of oak trees
interspersed among ponderosa pines. The fallen leaves in these oak
groves cover a layer of leaf mold, and under that is rich, loamy soil.

We already had the backpack frames from occasional hiking trips. My
husband strapped large plastic buckets to the frames so we can each haul
20 or 30 pounds down to our garden bed each trip. (Of course, we are
careful not to gather too much from any one spot.) The leaf mold mixed
with the original clay has quickly built up our garden soil. Too much
work, you say? Well, for a couple of retirees, it's more fun than work.
It gives us the exercise we need, and we enjoy the beauty of our woods.

-Mildred Baughman\
Apache Junction, Arizona

### Hammer Tip {.level3}

If you are planning to do some upholstering this winter, put a rubber
crutch tip or chairleg tip over the head of your hammer. This will save
the beauty of your upholstery tacks, and if you happen to miss the mark,
the wood won't be damaged

-A.M. Rader\
Wichita, Kansas

### Fancy Firewood {.level3}

To cover my woodpile for free, I simply go to the carpet shop and pick
up some old stair runners. They don't blow off like plastic tarps and
the price is certainly right.

-Raymond G. Wilcox\
Torrington, Connecticut

### For Want of a House, a Mill Was Built {.level3}

I wanted to build a log house, but a wall kit alone would cost about
\$8,000-more than I could afford. I knew that on my woodland I had
enough tulip poplar for the wall logs and enough pine for the framing.
The problem was getting the logs flat on two sides and cutting the pine
into lumber. I decided to build a sawmill.

In a salvage yard, I spotted a framework of angle iron in the shape of a
box. I bought it for \$5, along with two Volkswagen wheels with
spindles, bearings, and brake discs. These became the major components
of the mill.

I opened up the bottom of the angle iron box so the mill could pass over
the logs, and put wheels on *the legs*. The result was a framework in
the shape of a small gantry crane. The wheels run on tracks made from an
old aluminum extension ladder and have a flange on one side to keep them
on.the tracks. The tracks are mounted on pressure-treated 4 X 4s, and
another set of 4 X 4s outside of each rail helps keep *the mill* on
*the* tracks.

The hand blade runs on *the Volkswa* gen wheels, which I mounted *on*
the top *of* the *frame. I* welded a *pulley* from an old air compressor
to one of the brake discs to act as a drive wheel. For blade guides, I
bolted roller bearings to a plate attached to the frame below the
wheels, which can be adjusted to keep tension on the blade. The weight
of the two wheels made the mill top-heavy, so I put cement blocks on the
frame for counterweights.

*The mill is* powered with a'10-HP engine and V-belts that turn on a
*jack to* maintain the speed required to make even cuts. I bought my
blade from the Buckeye Saw Blade Company (4930 Provident Dr., P.O. Box
46857, Cincinnati, OH 45214). Mine is 149 inches long *with* a tooth
spacing of *.750* but they will make blades to any length. I know a man
who bought a commercial *mill for \$6,0W.* My homemade mill, with a new
engine, cost about \$3(10.

-;Fete Peterson\
Rock Tennessee

During the woodburning season, try this surefire idea. Place enough
kindling wood to start a fire in a paper grocery bag. Also include
crumpled newspaper and torn cartons. Punch a hole in the bag for draft
purposes, and place under logs in the fireplace. Now the fun part:
Simply light the bag. Last year I prepared more than a hundred sacks and
stacked them in our garage and basement. Save those bags!

-Eileen Janigo\
Hatley Wisconsin

### Sauerkraut Tea {.level3}

I nearly threw away a little porcelain teapot because the spout, which
was stained coal black, was too small to clean inside. Then a friend
from Germany told me to fill the pot with sauerkraut and leave it closed
for a couple of days. Lo and behold, at the end of two days I removed
the top to reveal a perfectly clean, snow white interior, as good as
brand new!

-Ann Hourdequin\
Athens, Georgia

### The Gift That Keeps On Giving {.level3}

If the battery in your wristwatch needs replacing and you happen to have
one of those musical greeting cards lying around the house, check the
battery in the card. I did, and found it contained an exact replacement
for my Timex watch. It has been running for two years now.

Jack Kiser\
Fremont, Ohio

### Do it Yourself Peanut Butter {.level3}

The last time the peanut butter monopoly boosted prices by the simple
expedient of reducing jar size by a third, I said, "Enough is enough is
too much!"

I bought two pounds of raw, shucked, skinless peanuts at the produce
market, roasted them (in a frying pan at low heat), sprinkled the
roasted nuts liberally with soy sauce (it imparts a richer flavor than
plain salt), and ran them through an ordinary hand-turned meat grinder.
The result was a greasy, grainy mass. To this I added olive oil and
stirred, and kept adding the oil and stirring until it achieved the
consistency of store-bought peanut butter.

With those two pounds of nuts, purchased for less than \$2,1 produced
ajar and a third of butter. You can further reduce the cost by
substituting any cooking oil or even room-temperature margarine for
olive oil.

Another great benefit of this do-it-yourself butter is that to the
peanuts you can add shelled sunflower or pumpkin seeds, other kinds of
nuts, whole grains, shredded coconut-almost anything nutritious and
delicious will do.

If raw, skinless peanuts are unavailable in your locality, use the
skins-on variety. The product will be slightly darker than store bought
butter, but its taste and nutritional quality won't suffer.

A minor disadvantage of homemade butter is that, not being homogenized,
the oil tends to rise to the surface and you'll need to stir it back
into the contents of the jar before serving.

But all in all, thank you, peanut butter Moguls, for making me a
thinking and imaginative consumer!

-R.C.W. Davis\
Zapopan, Mexico

### Sheath That Blade {.level3}

I recently discovered an inexpensive and easy way to protect a bucksaw
blade and keep it safe: Make a cover out a scrap piece of reinforced
hosing. First cut the hose to the length of the blade and then split it
lengthwise. It will wrap right around the teeth and help keep them
sharp..

\- Andrew Guskea, Jr\
Corry, Pennsylvania

### Cool Savings {.level3}

Living on an island, we find it essential to take coolers with freeze
packs when we grocery shop, because of the long trip home. As a result,
we always have several freeze packs in our freezer.An increase in
electricity rates inspired me to use the freeze packs to help our
refrigerator. I place a frozen pack in the top of the refrigerator, and
the next day after it partially thaws I exchange it for a frozen one,
returning the old pack to the freezer.

Our fridge motor runs less frequently, and we appear to be saving a
small but regular amount of electricity.

-Ross Westergaard\
Denman Island, British Columbia

### Grease Relief {.level3}

To remove the greasy oil and grime from your hands after working on your
tractor or car, rub your hands in vegetable oil before washing them in
soap and water. It costs much less than commercial hand cleaners, and
I've found it even gets the grease out from under my fingernails.

-Loma Ternyila\
Waldport, Oregon

### Naturally Clean {.level3}

These all natural "wet wipes" are indispensable for quick cleanups. When
stored in an airtight container (a small plastic-lidded coffee can works
perfectly), they remain moist, ever-ready and conveniently packable.
Simply use...

A homemade product that cleans your house without soiling our *Natural
Home*.

*I cup rainwater 1/4 cup antiseptic mouthwash (or ethyl rubbing alcohol
or vodka) 2 tsps. glycerin 12 drops lemon oil* Combine all of the
ingredients in a small bowl and mix well. Fold soft paper towels into
squares and soak them with the mixture (the cleaner listed above will
saturate approximately 125 towels). Then stack the wet towels into the
airtight container and cover tightly. You can discard the leftover
mixture or use it to saturate a few more paper towels.

You can also make a chemical-free nonirritating, pleasant-smelling,
insect repelling pet shampoo for a fraction of the price of shampoos
available in stores. It is perfectly fine for people to use as well,
especially when camping or fishing, when the insect-repelling qualities
are really appreciated. You'll need:

*2 cups of rainwater (boil the water beforehand because you're going to
use it topically)*\
*3/4 cup Murphy's Oil Soap 2 Tbs. glycerin*\
*2 Tbs. Listerine mouth wash (rubbing alcohol or vodka work well with
this* mixture too)\
*5 drops each of cedar and citrinella oil (optional to repel fleas,
ticks and mites)*

Add rainwater to liquid soap and heat on low until well mixed. Add the
glycerin and mouthwash (or alcohol) and stir. Then add the oils, blend
again and store in a tightly capped bottle. When shampooing pets,
remember to start at the head. When you start on the back or hind
quarters any insects that are present will instinctively search for
safer surroundings, and it's best to discourage them from getting near
your pets' sensitive eyes and ears. So start with the ears and work
back.

-Mikki Smith\
Lexington, Michigan

### *Country Cures* {.level3}

If you have a head cold, put a mentholated cough drop in lemon or herbal
tea. It helps clear your head and sooth your throat.

-Theresa Thompson\
Madison, Wisconsin

Remove a few twigs from a persimmon tree, cover them with water, and
boil for 20 minutes. Strain and cool the liquid. Applied on a poison ivy
or poison oak rash, it will stop the itch immediately, and after a few
applications will dry the rash.

*- Ken Dillard\
Gray Court, South Carolina*

### CapSavers {.level3}

Ever notice how billed caps tend to lose their shape when washed? After
I wash mine, I stretch it around the bottom of a pot that fits the hat.
The caps take back their form just like new.

*-Cheryl Miller\
Mount Horeb, Wisconsin*

### Hone Steel {.level3}

When I was working as a machinist trainee, I found that tool steel is
really handy for putting an edge on kitchen knives. It's strength and
hardness are perfect for the job. Now I keep a piece in the silverware
drawer. When a knife becomes dull, a couple of licks with the tool steel
gets it sharp and ready to use.

*-James Richards\
Charleston, West Virginia*

### Clean to a Tea {.level3}

Boil several old tea bags to get a mild tea solution. Let it cool to
lukewarm, remove the bags, and use the liquid to scrub your woodwork and
hardwood floors. The solution dries quickly and leaves no residue. It
not only deep cleans the wood but also prepares it for waxing or
polishing.

*-Carmen Wright\
Mayport, Pennsylvania*

### Just a Pinch {.level3}

I have a great remedy for immediately relieving leg cramps. Pinch your
upper lip just below your nose and the cramp will disappear. Believe me,
it works!

*-Renee Shermen\
Granite Falls, Minnesota*

### Get the Red Out {.level3}

To remove the gamey smell and bloodstains from hunting or butchering
clothes, soak them in cold saltwater. It should do the trick.

*-Nita Brainard\
Grangeville, Idaho*

*Send tips to: "Country Lore, " MOTHER EARTH NEWS,PO. Box 129, Arden, NC
28704. If you'd like our readers to get to know you, tell us something
about yourself (age, occupation, etc.). If you have a photo of yourself,
go ahead and send it to us.*

We'll try to make you famous!

### Letters About Lore {.level3}

**Woodstove Glue, Take Two**

I agree with Rebekah Kos of Aumsville, Oregon \[issue 121\]: Cleaning a
wood stove's glass doors can be a chore. Glass cleaner didn't help, and
oven cleaner burned my hands and attacked the stove's cast iron.
Instead, I take a damp pacer towel, dab it in the finest fireplace ash
and rub it on the glass. The soot and creosote will come off quickly and
easily.

*-Jeff* Mullin\
*West Chester, Ohio*

**Don't Hit PVC**

Please be aware that the solution for repairing garden hoses \[issue
125\] that calls for heating PVC pipe with a propane torch can be
extremely dangerous, even lethal. I recall reading an article about a
youth who constructed a tobacco pipe out of a section of PVC and died
after applying a match to the bowl and inhaling. That was a match, not a
propane torch. Spare yourself; purchase a new hose or find another way
to repair the one you have.

*-Claudia Morgan\
Providence, Rhode Island*

**Of Candles, Candy, and Cars**

After living in Alaska for 111 years, l thought the advice to burn
candles in a snowbound car \[issue 121 *1* was common knowledge. What
Sandy Beadle failed to mention is that you need to crack the window a
bit to keep the candle from depleting the oxygen in the car. Wet snow or
freezing rain can seal vents and make a car airtight It's also a good
idea to keep a can of nuts, some jerky, or granola bars in the car for
those unexpected delays. This is especially important if you are
diabetic or hypoglycemic.

*-Janelle Myers\
Irvine, Kentucky*

**Wiper Fluid No-No**

I would advise people not to use windshield washer fluid for household
use \[issue 121). The fluid contains antifreeze and other toxins that
can be very harmful to humans and pets The savings are not worth the
risks. Instead, try using vinegar and water for window cleaning.

*-Kelly Bastin\
Paragon, Indiana*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71356-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix003.html#a71356-0)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71356-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix003.html#a71356-1)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71356-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix003.html#a71356-2)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71356-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix003.html#a71356-3)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71356-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix003.html#a71356-4)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter005.html}

::: body
# [Coping With Flea and Tick Season - and Other Pet Health Issues](#toc.html#chap-5) {.chapter-title}

**Keeping dogs away from deer ticks, searching cats for external
parasites, why dogs pant, the dangers of shearing dogs, preventing dogs
from biting hot spots, transporting pets in the car.**

**By Emily Miller**

**August/September 1991**

Country Vet

Helping your pet through fleas, ticks and the dog days.\

THE DOG DAYS OF SUMMER ARE UPON US. IN Vermont, we are getting ready for
the Champlain Valley Fair, zucchinis are the size of baseball bats,
prize sheep and pigs are getting their annual (though unwanted) bath,
and nights are a bit cooler. But for all the outward placidity of these
last summer days, it's a battle ground in the jungle of your pet's fur.
In most areas of the country, late summer is the height of the flea and
tick season.

It's important to remember that as your animal begins to spend more time
inside, so do their unwanted friends. And as the fall draws nearer, the
fleas and ticks on Duke's or Cleo's back are going to bug you; they'll
want to nest in your sofa, your bed, or your children's beds. They will
make a home everywhere that your pet does after a long day of
ball-chasing or mousing.

Unfortunately, really successful parasite prevention starts around tax
day, but it's never too late to take Fido in hand and get a grip on what
could be a late-summer infestation. But before you start, sit back for a
minute or two, listen to the crickets, drink a glass of lemonade, and
feel a few rays of the sun filter through the maple trees to your feet.
After all, summer just never lasts long enough.

Q: I'm very cautious about exposing my children to Lyme disease, but my
dog just bounds into danger areas. What can I do?

A: You're right to worry about keeping your children from bounding into
danger areas. Deer ticks care who plays host to them and will hop onto a
child just as readily as a dog.

As far as curtailing a possible infestation of your dog, there are
definitely things you can do. Keeping pets and persons away from those
"danger areas" (including deep wood; marshy, reedy areas; and very
grassy fields) is a good start. Given that it is impossible to restrain
the animal's activities, it's important to know how you can have the
upper hand in tick control:

Grooming is very important. First, brush out your dog's hair. Once the
animal is not tangled or matted and the bulk of the undercoat is gone,
use as fine a comb as your animal will tolerate to remove any loose
parasites as well as their eggs that may be clinging to the skin or
hair.

Tick baths and powders can be very effective. However, if you have a
hound that won't get out of the water (a retriever, poodle, or pointer),
this may not be practical; all the tick-fighting chemicals will be
washed off. Should you decide to go with a powder, ask your vet to
recommend one. Bear in mind: These powders are highly toxic and you may
want to reconsider if you have a dog with a delicate constitution or you
have very young children.

Be responsible about the dog's environment. Keep his area indoors
cleaned and, vacuumed. Cedar bedding helps keep down the number of
parasites indoors because fleas and ticks don't like the smell. If you
have a bad infestation, you can spray the ground outside with an
insecticide, and powder or bomb inside.

I believe strongly in the herbal alternative. Regrettably, this is a
preventative measure, not a post-fact cleanup. Adding brewer's yeast and
garlic to your dog's diet starting in the early spring changes his body
smell and confuses parasites. Dotting herbal oils such as eucalyptus,
cedar, or mint on your pet's ears, throat, hindquarters, and abdomen can
help to make those very stupid parasites think your dog isn't one.

Finally, remember to protect your dog from Lyme disease with the newly
available vaccine.

Q: My cat has been out all summer and is scratching. What should I look
for to see if she has ticks or fleas? Is a flea collar a good idea?

A: What's a good idea is a sort of weekly "physical" exam of your cat.
Hold her in your arms and feel her spine, legs, abdomen, and chest for
any lumps, bumps, or rashes. Pull her lips back and look at her teeth
and gums for discoloration. Cat's usually hate this, but if you're
really familiar with what your cat looks and feels like when she's
healthy, you'll know a lot sooner when she's not.

Fleas will leave a dark, somewhat angular debris on the skin of a cat.
Generally, if a cat has fleas, there will be some of this debris on the
head and at the base of the ears, on the belly near the hind legs, and
around the neck. Ticks are less common among cats, but can be present if
the cat wanders in densely wooded areas. A tick looks like a little
brown, black, or flesh-colored growth. If filled with blood, it looks
like a bean. Remove carefully with tweezers by grasping the tick near
where it has attached itself to your cat's skin. Ticks bury their heads
in the animal, so remove carefully in order to get the whole bug. Once
removed, wrap in tissue and flush down the toilet.

If your cat is scratching and you don't see any sign of parasites, call
your vet. Depending on what's occurring on the skin (scaly red patches,
hair loss, or circular raised patterns), your pet may be the victim of
dermatitic mange, roundworm, or allergies.

At best, flea collars deter fleas from hopping on your cat. If your cat
is already infested, you have to remove the fleas from his body and his
living space before you think about prevention. Generally, this means a
flea bath for the cat and his bedding, and a flea bomb for your house.
Ask your vet to recommend one, because the bombs and shampoos available
from vets are usually more effective than those sold over the counter.

Understand that one flea dip for your kitty may not be enough. Fleas are
very tough, resilient critters and their eggs may be totally unharmed by
the chemicals you bombard them with. Follow up with powders for your cat
and his bedding. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of flea powder,
however, so my cat receives the brewer's yeast and garlic mixture in his
food the whole year round. I started with a little bit (about a pinch of
each) last January and slowly added more until now when he blithely
gobbles down half a teaspoon of yeast and a clove of chopped, fresh
garlic every day. I can't say that we are entirely flea free, but at
least he is never badly infested.

Flea collars are highly toxic just read the directions on the back about
how to dispose of the package. In terms of effectiveness, they may help
deter fleas from entering the neck area, but that's about it. Given
their limited benefit and extreme toxicidity, I don't feel comfortable
in recommending them.

Q: My older dog is panting a lot and it's not even that hot out. Can you
explain why?

A: As animals mature, many of the same problems associated with old age
in humans occur in them. Your older dog may be panting more due to
decreased lung capacity. Since panting is one of the two ways dog's
release heat (the other is through the pads of their feet), your dog has
to pant, or breathe more often to cool himself down.

Q: I always see dogs sheared for summer. Should I do that for my St.
Bernard?

A: No, absolutely not. Your dog's hair is very important to keeping her
cool. It helps to insulate her from the heat as well as the cold. It is
important to remove all the undercoat (dead, fluffy secondary hair
produced by double-coated dogs like the St. Bernard).

If she won't let you do it, definitely bring her to the groomer's.
Removal of the undercoat will prevent matting and allow the air to
circulate freely to the skin, as well as allow the heat to escape her
body. If you shear your dog, you run a risk of heat stroke as her body
will be unaccustomed to the sun.

Q: There is a lot of barbed wire on my property and I'm scared my dog
will cut herself on it. I can't keep her inside all day. What should I
do?

A: If it really concerns you, consider not letting the dog run freely
without supervision. In the event that an accident does happen, first
aid for dogs is not dissimilar to that for humans. Wash any cuts
thoroughly with warm, soapy water. Use anti-bacterial ointment like
Bacitracen. Cover the cut if needed, but it will heal more quickly if
exposed to the open air. Check for signs of infection: redness,
swelling, tenderness, discharge. Always bring your animal to her vet if
you have any questions.

Q: My dog is constantly biting spots on his leg, especially after
swimming. He's almost torn the fur away in parts and the area is red.
What is bothering him?

A: It sounds like your dog may have dermatitic "hot spots." When a dog's
skin is irritated, or if he is bored, he may "worry" the area of
irritation raw with little chewing motions. It can get very red and even
become infected.

Hot spots can be brought on by allergies to bug bites, by irritation
caused by plants, or from the matting of a wet undercoat, which then
shrinks and rubs against the skin. If your dog has constant skin
problems, get him checked for allergies. It's not just human beings who
get allergic reactions to airborne agents like mold, leaves, even grass.
If skin irritation is constant, he might have a food allergy; if it is
seasonal, possibly an airborne allergy. If your dog has long or
double-coated hair, like a St. Bernard or a huskie, check to be sure
that all his undercoat is removed and he has no mats.

The easiest solution to hot spots is an over-the-counter antibacterial
called "Sulfadene." It's topical and can be applied several times a day.
Again, if your dog is chronically affected or if the "hot spot" becomes
infected, see his vet.

Q: My kids run our spaniel around all day in the summer. He chases them
out in the field for hours and I'm worried he's going to overheat.

A: It's been known to happen. I know of owners happily playing frisbee
with their retrievers, only to see them fall at their feet, dazed and
unresponsive. It is vital to hydrate your animal.

Dogs don't sweat. They maintain their body temperature only through
panting and releasing heat from the pads of their feet. They need water
to cool the inside of their body down. To test for dehydration, grab a
handful of skin at the scruff of your dog's neck, then release it. It
should spring back into place. If the fold of skin stays and sort of
oozes back into place, your dog needs water. Try it when you know your
dog is fully hydrated to familiarize yourself.

Tell your kids to bring a bike bottle full of water for your dog and for
them. Bike bottles are ideal because you can squirt water directly into
the dog's mouth so you don't need to carry anything for him to drink out
of. In fact, all excursions with Rover should include a container of
water. It gets hot for hounds too, and they can't ask you to buy them a
Coke.

Q: My husband insists on bringing the dog with him in the car, even when
we run errands for stretches. Is this safe?

A: A good answer to this question has to have two parts: First, the
safety of your dog when the car is moving, and second, when it's not.

Many dogs are harmed by not being restrained while riding in cars. I
know dogs love to ride with their heads out of the window, however,
there are countless cases of dogs being injured while engaged in this
activity. Restraining your dog in the back seat may be as simple as
installing a pet gate. Also, special seats that buckle into seat belts
are available for small dogs.

Dogs love to ride in the back of pickups, but please, put him in a crate
and secure the crate tightly to the truck. Keeping your dog secure in
the car can help you be a safer driver and keep your "best friend" from
being another accident statistic.

When running errands, try to take your dog with you. You'd be surprised
how many understanding business people (and fellow pet lovers) allow
dogs. It never hurts to ask. If bringing your dog is impossible,
remember that the interior of a car can easily reach 110°F in less than
half an hour. Park in the shade and put a sun visor in the windshields.
If your car is equipped with blinds for toddlers, pull those down as
well. Crack the windows for ventilation and leave plenty of water.

Finally, if at any time you question whether or not it's too hot to
bring your dog, don't.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71358-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix004.html#a71358-0)

Fleas can jump (top) off your cat and onto anything even you. Their tiny
eggs(above) can hide anywhere. A tick (left) dining al fresco on fido
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71358-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix004.html#a71358-1)

Emily Miller, a longtime animal care specialist at Pet Patrol in New
York State, has spent most of her life in very rural Vermont with
several cats and two St. Bernards. She is currently the mother of a
marmalade tabby Sam, and is in search of the perfect Australian
Shepherd.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71358-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix004.html#a71358-2)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter006.html}

::: body
# [American Farm Food](#toc.html#chap-6) {.chapter-title}

**A sampler of family favorite recipes, including autumn sandwiches,
frosted chocolate creams, dandelion greens.**

**By Mary Karenou**

**August/September 1991**

Mother's Kitchen

A sampler of one family's favorite recipes.

By Mary Karenou

WHEN JANEE N ALETTA SARLIN SET out to collect a few of her family's
recipes, she probably didn't know she would create a treasure for
generations to come. And not just for her family.

*Food From An American Farm* (Simon & Schuster, \$24.95) is a wonderful
look at farm food, complete with trimmings. Reading this cookbook is as
fun as eating "Best Frosted Chocolate Creams" and as satisfying as
"Great-Grandmother Broadwater's Chicken and Biscuits." Sarlin intended
to create a book that celebrated the life of an American farm. She ended
up with a celebration of a way of cooking that has fallen too far out of
fashion in these low-fat, cholesterol-free days. In Food from an
*American Farm,* the day starts with a hearty meal of "Brown and White
Breakfast Fries,"

"Stove-Top Omelet," and perhaps some "Homemade Sausage with Gram's Down
Home Flavor." In these days of 101 new ways with NutraSweet, it's
comforting to know that the only eggbeaters used in this book were in
Grandma's hands, whipping up a hearty batch of "Farmer-Style Crumbled
Bacon and Eggs."

Sarlin also shares with us the stories behind several recipes, many of
which are *as delightful as the recipes themselves. Her* section on
cookies (each recipe being her "absolute favorite cookie," says Sarlin
with complete sincerity), is prefaced by a story concerning her mother's
habit of licking an oatmeal batter-smeared bowl while doing a convincing
horse imitation involving "chewing, snorting, neighing, and stomping
around on all fours."

Sarlin's description of basic methods, along with her inclusion of
master recipes, is very helpful to those who are rediscovering the food
of their youth. After all, not all of us were fortunate enough to grow
up with Gram's black book (an unlined hardcover that Sarlin's
grandmother wrote her recipes in, often with no detailed
methodology-just misspelled ingredients), including techniques for
perfect "Potato-Water Bread" and a hearty "Beef Broth."

As culinary trends leave the lean-and-mean California cuisine of the
'80s behind, it's refreshing to see that the continuing search for
perfect preparation of wholesome and natural ingredients has now ended
right where it all started-on the American farm.

In the following excerpt from her book, Janeen describes the meals-and
the memories-that make farm life special.

**Autumn Sandwiches**

In October we served these aromatic hot sandwiches to the crew of corn
pickers. When the men opened the sandwich bags, fragrant steam curled
out. These delicious sandwiches also warmed their cold fingers.

If there was a large crew, we filled and wrapped all the sandwiches and
placed them in a large, dry roasting pan. Mom covered the pan and heated
them in a hot oven for approximately 10 minutes. I car ried the whole
business out to the men.

Mom used a stewing chicken to make the filling, but I prefer a fat
roasting chicken. Be sure to butter the sandwich buns generously on both
sides before adding the hot chicken, so the chicken does not soak into
the bread. I serve these sandwiches topped with a skewered sweet pickle
on top of the bun. For a casual supper, add a tossed mixed green salad
and crisp potato chips.

**Recipe:**

*1 four-pound roasting chicken with fat and neck, but no giblets.\
1-1 /2 teaspoons salt\
1 teaspoon black pepper, freshly ground\
1 carrot, peeled and sliced*\
*1 medium onion, peeled and stuck with two cloves*\
*2 stalks celery, sliced\
1 /4 teaspoon salt*\
*Dash cayenne pepper\
1 /2 teaspoon black pepper\
1 /2 cup green pepper, finely chopped*

Cut chicken into pieces; place in large stockpot with lid (dark meat on
the bottom and white meat on the top). Generously season with salt and
pepper. Add carrot, onion, and celery to the meat. Cover with enough
cold water to come 3/4 of the way up the meat. Cover pan and bring to a
boil. Reduce heat and simmer for about 1 hour, turning over once or
twice, or until well done (meat should fall off the bones).

When meat is done: Set strainer over large bowl; pour chicken,
vegetables, and broth into the strainer. Shake off excess broth, then
return broth collected in bowl to pot. Bring to a rolling boil and
reduce broth until only 2 cups remain; this will take about 20 to 25
minutes. Set aside to cool and allow fat to surface.

Meanwhile: Separate chicken meat from skin, bones, and fat. Cut meat
across grain into cubes 1-1/2 to 2 inches thick. Discard everything
else. Place cubed chicken in bowl and set aside.

To assemble: Skim fat off broth and discard; pour reduced broth over
chicken. Season chicken with salt, cayenne, black and green pepper;
taste and correct seasoning.

To serve: Remove from heat and spoon large serving of chicken into
buttered sandwich bun. Serve quickly.

To store: Place mixture in airtight container; refrigerate overnight or
up to 4 days.

To reheat: Place seasoned chicken along with jellied broth in saucepan;
cover and slowly bring to a boil. Serve as above.

**Best Frosted Chocolate Creams**\

To me, Gram's chocolate creams tasted better then Mom's. I was positive
that the reason had something to do with her pantry. It was filled with
a combination of lavender, onion, garlic, and chocolate aromas.

My every visit was rewarded with some savory or sweet surprise.

Grams tried every variation of this recipe. "Best" was noted next to the
list of ingredients for this cookie; no explanation necessary.

Chocolate was ever present at the conclusion of our family Christmas
celebration. Uncle Buzz, a veteran chocoholic, and Uncle Roy, a devout
lover of food in general, along with Dad-who was part and party to these
shenanigans-egged each other on during dinner to see who could consume
the most. Our family gatherings were not solemn affairs.

This soft, cake-like cookie melts in your mouth-a chocolate lover's idea
of heaven.

Recipe:\
Dough

*1 /2 cup butter 1 cup sugar*\
2 eggs\
*2 ozs.(squares) unsweetened chocolate, melted and cooled\
1 teaspoon vanilla\
1 teaspoon baking soda\
2-1/2 cups flour\
3 /4 cup milk*\
\
Frosting\
*2 ozs. unsweetened chocolate\
*2 tablespoons butter\
*2 cups powdered sugar\
2 teaspoons vanilla*\
*2 teaspoons (approximately) heavy cream\
60 pecan halves for garnish*\
\

Preheat oven to 400°.

Cream butter and sugar together until light and fluffy; add eggs, melted
chocolate, and vanilla; mix well.

Combine soda and flour together. Alternately add flour mixture and milk
to egg batter, beating well after each addition.

Drop by teaspoonfuls, 2 inches apart, onto ungreased baking sheets. Bake
8 to 10 minutes, or until dull on top and firm to the touch. Remove
cookies from sheets immediately and cool on rack.

To frost: Melt chocolate and butter in saucepan; remove from heat. Stir
in sugar, vanilla, and enough cream to become spreading consistency.

Frost cookies after they are completely cool (but the frosting should
still be slightly warm). With table knife or small spatula, swirl
frosting around top of cookie. Place a perfect pecan half on top before
frosting is set.Let frosting set.

Store in cookie tin, placing waxed paper between layers of cookies. Can
be kept 5 to 6 days in cool place. Do not freeze.\

**Dandelion Greens**\
2 quarts dandelion greens\
3 slices bacon\
1 tablespoons butter\
1 cup hot water\
1 tablespoon sugar\
1 1/2 teaspoons\
1/4 teaspoon salt\
1/4 teaspoon black pepper, freshly ground ground\
1/4 to 1/2 cup heavy cream

Wash greens, dry and reserve.

In stainless steel or enamel skillet, fry bacon until crisp. Remove
bacon; drain on brown paper bag or towels and reserve. Stir flour into
pan drippings, adding a bit of butter if necessary; cook until brown.

Whisk in water, stirring constantly; boil 3 to 4 minutes. Add sugar,
vinegar, salt, and pepper; taste and correct seasonings. Add cream, as
needed, to dress greens. Stir in greens and cook 4 to 5 minutes or until
well wilted. Taste, and correct seasonings, if necessary.

Crumble reserved bacon and sprinkle on top. Serve with fried chicken and
boiled or mashed potatoes. Or garnish the top, if you like, with 2
hard-boiled eggs, chopped; serve over toast. Serves 6. 6

### Cookbook Roundup {.level3}

SOME GOOD COOKS HAVE HUNDREDS OF cookbooks in their collections, some a
trusted two or three. A few are even good enough to cook all our
favorites from memory. But for those who enjoy adding a treasure or two
to their repertoire each season, we recommend these country-inspired,
fresh fall selections.

If you're like many people and cutting back a bit on beef, you've
probably reached that point where the thought of another grilled chicken
breast is ',I enough to send you screaming. Take heart a nd take a look
at Lorraine Bodger's ***Chicken Dinners*** (Harmony Books). Arranged by
season, *Chicken Dinners* details 24 seasonal menus featuring fowl. As
elaborate as "Chicken Quenelles in Escarole Soup" and as simple as
"Simple Skillet Chicken with Lemon and Thyme," *Chicken Dinners* is a
wonderful source book for seasonal ideas and interesting combinations.
For those who thought they had the perfect fried chicken recipe, word
has it that the "Beer-Batter-Fried Chicken

Drumsticks" are the best around.

Serve with "Grilled Vegetables" and corn on the cob and be able to look
at a chicken again.

Mary Emmerling is no stranger to country-style or country cooking. Her
previous books have included many coffee-table quality country-classic
furnishing guides as well as great collections of recipes from her
family and friends. Despite all this, it is best to approach Mary
Emmerling's *At Home in the Country* (Clarkson Potter) as the eye candy
that it is. Every recipe emphasizes the fresh and wonderful, although
one can't help but wonder who's idea of country cooking in cludes
arugula, cantaloupe, and prosciutto salad. Granted, Mary Emmerling is to
country cooking what Ralph Lauren is to country-style but unlike most
who like to think they invented a generations-old genre, Emmerling can't
help but improve on it a little.

*Heartland: The Best of the Old and the New from Midwest Kitchens* (also
Clarkson Potter) is, plainly, the best cookbook devoted to the Midwest
in quite a while. From award-winning author Marcia Adams, Heartland
"brings to life the food and folkways of America's sprawling Midwest."
Indeed. Adams divided the book by state (Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio, Wisconsin) and, keeping true to her
title, focuses on traditional regional delights (Ohio's peanut butter
"buckeyes") and local nouveau specialties ("Corn Chowder" from
Wisconsin's L'Etoile restaurant). As a transplanted Michigander, I was
thrilled to see a page devoted exclusively to pasties (tasty portable
meals in pastry) and early fall favorites like apple fritters and baked
cherry dumplings. It was especially nostalgic to hear Adams describe the
practice of "planking" Michigan whitefish. Often served in seafood
houses, planking involves baking the fish on a wooden slab garnished
with piped potatoes, and then serving the whole business as is with a
lemon and some melted butter-a whole meal on a what would seem to be a
cutting board. As they say, if you buy only one cookbook this year...

For everyone who faces another year of the school lunchbox battle, *The
Creative Lunchbox* by Ellen Klavan (Crown Publishers) comes to the
rescue. As too many parents know, an empty box doesn't mean an eaten
box. You can't be in the lunchroom with them, so how do you stop Lauren
or Jason from trading their tofu for Twinkies? A quick skim through *The
Creative Lunchbox will* help. Klavan knows all the tricks (cut raw
veggies into interesting shapes, like curly celery sticks) to entice
young eaters, and enough flavorful combinations to keep them interested
(bananawich anyone?). More than just nuttytious and tasty, Klavan keeps
the 3-S's theory close to heart: Brown bagging should be squish-proof,
sog-proof, and spoil-proof. After all, anything can be fresh and
appealing at 7:30 a.m. (especially through bleary eyes) but under the
harsh glare of lunchroom lights (not to mention the critical gaze of
fellow classmates), bag lunches often fall short. Klavan's recipes for
sandwiches, salads, hot meals, and drinks, however, should keep even the
fussiest eater happy\--well, at least until Halloween.

Also of Interest: Got a craving for a bottle Butterfield's Birch Beer
and Pines Cream,-Soda! Need a nibble of Norman's Nordic Kringle? Fret no
further. You won't have to get without whatever homemade local edible
you fell in love with on your last pip downs back country *road now that
Ford Finds: America's Best Local Foods and the People Who Produce Them*
by Jane and Michael Stern With Collins) has been revised, ups and
enlarged to include 250 of the original 340 items plus 150 all new
vendors. Each entry includes descriptions not only of the foods
themselves, but also of the people who, make them and how they are made,
as well as information on how to visit and how to order by mail. So
should you 1e short some Sanitary Fish Market Restaurant Hush Puppy Mix
or even need a recipe for R & R brownies, you'll find it.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71360-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix005.html#a71360-0)

Author Sarlin celebrates a way of cooking that has fallen too far out of
fashion
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71360-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix005.html#a71360-1)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71360-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix005.html#a71360-2)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71360-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix005.html#a71360-3)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71360-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix005.html#a71360-4)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71360-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix005.html#a71360-5)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter007.html}

::: body
# [Weather Forecasting](#toc.html#chap-7) {.chapter-title}

**Predicting weather, including basics, clouds, winds, pressure systems,
humidity.**

**By Ceylon Monroe**

**August/September 1991**

Your Eyes Can Keep You Dry.

By Ceylon Monroe.

When you walk in the woods or open country, where do your eyes play? Of
you're like me, you easily get wrapped up in plodding-figuring out where
the next footfall will be-instead of observing. No wonder the weather
catches us by surprise.; we're just not paying attention. The sky, the
greenery, the ground and their inhabitants provide a constant flow of
clues about what the atmosphere holds in store.All we need to tap this
24-hour weather report is a sharp set of senses. Just look, listen,
feel, and yes, even sniff.

For example, have you ever noticed that the odor of rotting wood (maybe
mixed with the scent of mint) seems more pungent some days than others?
There's a perfectly good explanation: When atmospheric pressure is high,
odors are subdued-held in; when it drops, they waft into the air.

Predicting weather without the meteorologist's arsenal of
instrumentation is mostly a matter of charting changes. A onetime
viewing of clouds, for instance, isn't nearly as sure as a comparison of
the current situation with the type of clouds present a few hours, even
a few days, ago. In fact, any single predictor mentioned in this article
is of little value. Weather has defied such simplification for eons. So
look for evidence from every source available, and hazard a guess only
when the majority of the symptoms point to the same prognosis.

### Regional Weather {.level3}

Lay weather forecasters who've lived in an area for many years often
become quite proficient, because they've learned from experience what a
particular condition tells about the future weather. Even if you've
lived in one place for only a year or two, you probably know from what
direction the wind usually blows.

When you pack into a wilderness many hours (or days) from home, you
start without the benefit of experience: You don't know what the
prevailing wind is, what direction storms usually approach from, or how
the topography affects the weather.

If you're heading into federally controlled backcountry, the regional
ranger station may be able to offer a detailed weather history of the
area. Perhaps locals-outfitters, itinerant fisherman, or even your
friendly bartender-are willing to part with some of their accumulated
weather wisdom. Barring the closer sources, the National Climatic Data
Center is the repository for weather information, Two helpful
publications they offer are Comparative Climatic Data for the United
States and Climatic Atlas of the United States. You can order them for
\$4 and \$15 respectively from NDCD, Federal Building, Asheville, NC
28801-2682, attention: Publications.

### Weather Basics {.level3}

Before we can get down to specific prognostication, we'll need to review
some basic weather principles. On a large scale, weather systems in
North America-in fact, in all the middle latitudes of the Northern
Hemisphere-are carried from west to east by the jet stream. Prevailing
high altitude winds are from the west. (Please note: It's all reveresed
in the Southern Hemisphere). Regional lower-level winds, however, swing
around the points of the compass as the air in higher-pressure areas
moves toward lower-pressure areas in attempts to equalize barometric
differences (see illustration above).

The process goes something like this: Air descends in a high-pressure
system (literally a tall stack of atmosphere) and spirals outward in a
clockwise rotation. Because the air has come from high altitude, it
carries little moisture, givin high-pressure systems a reputation for
fair weather. The air moved outward, continuing its descent, and the
pressure becomes progressively lower. As the air mass passes close to
the ground, it picks up moisture. At a certain point, the winds begin
spiraling inward to the low in a counterclockwise direction. Accumulated
moisture may form clouds and eventually drop out as a precipitation.
Hence the low-pressure system's reputation for inclement weather.

There are three important things to remember about general circulation
and the movement of air from highs to lows. First, high-level winds
carry weather systems west to east (usually from the southwest in summer
and from the northwest in winter); second, lower-level winds (the ones
you're most aware of) may be entirely different from the general
circulation; and third, lower-level winds move counterclockwise around
lows.

Clouds, wind, humidity and pressure are the symptoms of approaching
weather. The mix foretells one of three conditions: stable weather, the
arrival of a cold front, or the arrival of a warm front. A front is
simply the disturbance at the boundary between masses of colder and
warmer air-a sometimes violently unstable region that produces most of
our bad weather.

If it's a cold front, the heavier cold air will push under the warm, and
there may be severe weather (thunderstorms in summer) of short duration.
If it's a warm front, the lighter warm air pushes over the cold, and
there's likely to be protracted (but usually not very heavy)
precipitation. Most often, cold fronts come and go quickly, while warm
fronts give more warning and last longer. On average, a cold front will
pass through every five to seven days, so you're not being paranoid if
it seems to rain only on weekends.

An intervening warm front-arriving a couple of days after the cold-may
not be strong enough to bring any precipitation. Nonetheless, two to
three days (the usual interval between warm and cold) is the farthest in
advance you can make a halfway reliable seat-of-the-pants weather
prediction. And just like that questionable sale on the evening news,
your accuracy will decline dramatically the farther you look into the
future. Still, since you're outdoors, at least you'll never get caught
forecasting a chance of rain in the middle of a downpour.

If you've lived in one place for only a year or two, you probably know
from what direction the wind usually blows.

### Clouds {.level3}

There are two basic types of clouds: heap (cumulus) and layered
(stratus). These are further segregated by their altitude (cirrus for
high, alto for medium) and their tendency to deliver precipitation
(nimbus). Clouds often violate this neat categorization by being both
basic types at once-the stratocumulus, for example-by changing form one
to another or by adopting unique characteristics. As a result,
descriptive words are often tagged onto a cloud's name, such as cumulus
congestus (a cumulus trying to become a cumulonimbus) or stratocumulus
mammatus (an unstable cloud with bags hanging down).

Fortunately, to predict the weather, we need to know only 11 of the
hundreds of cloud permutation. The important 11 and what they portend,
as well as the sequences in which they occur in different types of
weather, are shown on pages 40 and 41.

An important trend in any type of deteriorating weather is the lowering
of cloud bottoms. As the system approaches, the clouds will form at
lower and lower altitudes. Low clouds with irregular under-:,¢ sides are
most likely to produce heavy,precipitation.

Clouds also affect the way the sky and celestial objects look, leading
to some of the best-known folk weather predictors. Most people are
familiar with the adage: "Red sky at night, sailor's delight; red sky at
morning, sailor take warning." It's been with us at least since the time
of heophrastus in the three hundreds B.C. There's a lot to this one, as
long as you're looking in the right direction; not into the setting or
rising sun but at the opposite horizon. Red implies lower-level, water
bearing clouds. Thus if the red is in the *4* west, rain may be on the
way. But if in the east the system is beating a retreat. Likewise, a
rainbow to the east or west tells you there's rain in that direction.

Another well-known and accurate portent of falling weather is a large
halo around the moon, indicating a thin layer of cirrostratus clouds. If
the winds are from any point between northeast and south, precipitation
is likely within 24 hours. If the halo (either moon or sun) changes to a
frosted appearance, altostrati have moved in, suggesting precipitation
within 12-20 hours. (Note also that this sequence of clouds augurs an
approaching warm front.)

On average, a cold front will pass through every 5 to 7 days, so you're
not paranoid if it seems to rain only on weekends.\

### Winds {.level3}

As a general rule, fair weather comes from the southwest in summer and
the northwest in winter, but it's very helpful to know what the
prevailing wind is in your locale. Nature offers some clues: Trees show
the undersides of their leaves when the wind shifts form its usual
direction. Silver maples and cottonwoods are particularly helpful
because the bottoms of their leaves are silvery white. To know what the
wind direction is at the moment, look for a perched bird. It will almost
always face into the wind.

Once you know where the fair-weather wind comes from, watch for change.
If the wind shifts counterclockwise to between the south and northeast,
there's likely to be bad weather in the next 24 hours. Likewise, if you
notice that the wind is shifting in a clockwise manner from between
south and northeast to the west, the weather is probably going to
improve.

Armed with the knowledge that winds rotate counterclockwise around a low
and that the storm system as a whole is headed east, you can be a lot
more specific about the approach of bad weather. If you face into the
wind and raise your right arm straight to the side, it points into the
low. If you know which direction is which-and you should, if you're out
in the sticks-you can figure out whether the storm is coming toward you,
passing to the north or passing to the south, based on the assumption
that the system as a whole is headed east.

Now we're going to embellish the "face the wind" axiom a bit, to make it
more accurate and to learn even more about what's coming. Because of
friction, the surface wind direction is different from the lower-level
wind circulating around a low. If they're available, use low-floating
clouds to determine the lower-level wind direction. Otherwise, adjust by
using the following corrections: Over rough terrain, the surface wind is
turned inward (toward the low's center) about 30°; over open water, the
deflection is only 15°. Thus you should turn somewhere between 15° and
30° to your right to correct for surface friction.

Should the skies cooperate and allow you to see lower-level and
upper-level clouds at the same time, it's simple to predict with the
"crosswind rule." Face into the oncoming lower clouds (this saves having
to worry about surface friction), and note the direction that the upper
clouds are coming from. If they're coming from your right, the storm is
approaching; if they're coming from the left, it has passed; if they're
coming toward you, you're on the south side of the system, and the
weather will stay pretty much the same; and if they're moving away,
you're to the north, and-again-the weather will be steady.

To know what the wind direction is at the moment, look for a perched
bird.It will almost always face into the wind.

### Humidity and Pressure {.level3}

Cold and warm fronts have characteristic patterns of humidity and
barometric pressure. Before a cold front arrives, humidity will usually
remain steady or rise only slightly, and the barometric pressure will
drop fairly rapidly (depending on the storm's intensity). After the
front's passage, the humidity will drop precipitously and the pressure
will shoot up. A warm front will be preceded by increasing humidity and
steadily (but slowly dropping) pressure. Once it's passed, the humidity
will be steady or even increase slightly and the pressure will rise a
little.

Signs of change in humidity and pressure come from our own senses and
from clues offered by plants and animals. People who are prone to the
aches and pains of sore joints have more trouble when it's humid.
There's a statistical correlation between antisocial behavior and low
barometric pressure.

So, in general, we're likely to feel worse physically and mentally when
the humidity is increasing and the pressure is dropping.

Sound travels farther when the air pressure is low; many people claim
that distant noises seem almost to be coming down a tunnel. Another sign
of low pressure is smoke that curls over toward the ground. Likewise,
visibility often drops off in the haze of low pressure and high
humidity. (Over water, though, high visibility may be a sign of unstable
air that portends a storm.)

With pressure increases, smoke will rise straight up, odors will be
subdued, the water level in dug wells will drop noticeably, ice on ponds
may crack, and if you've toted any canned goods along on an outing, the
tops might pop in. Though it may seem counter-indicative at first, dew,
frost, or ground fog in the morning is a sign of low humidity and good
weather. Only when the air is dry and clear will the earth's surface
give up enough heat to the night sky to cause condensation.

Animal and plant indications of humidity/pressure abound. If you see
significant numbers of deer moving down from the mountains to the
valleys, expect snow within a day or two. Look for birds flying at high
altitude in times of high barometric pressure. On the other hand, when
hawks and vultures play on rising columns of air called thermals,
conditions are ripe for forming cumulus congestus and maybe cumulonimbus
clouds. It's also been variously reported that before bad weather
insects swarm near the ground; swallows and other insect eaters fly low;
frogs croak a lot; rodents such as mice and squirrels are frisky and
noisy; birds chirp and may feed at unusual times; trout shun artificial
enticements and leap for swarming insects; spiders will build up their
webs eight hours prior to a storm but disassemble them if it's to be a
bad blow; bees will stay close to home; ants will travel in columns
rather than scattering; plants, including chickweed, clover, dandelions,
hawkweed, indigo, African marigolds, tulips, and scarlet pimpernel,
close up and the pitcher plant opens.

### Weather or Not {.level3}

Weather prediction skills can be vital in the backcountry, but they're
also a heck of a lot of fun day to day. I find it healthy to pause in
the office parking lot to look up and apply the "crosswind rule." It
helps to at least temporarily restore an intimacy with the environment
that bricks, beams, and video screens too quickly steal. Besides, it
keeps my fellows wondering about me.

But there are penalties as well. More mornings than not, my spouse's
first words-often before I've opened both eyes-are,. "What's the weather
going to be today?" I roll my head back, gaze out the window at the sky,
and spout something like, "I'd say 30% chance of rain unless it
doesn't."

**Sequences of Clouds Before Fronts**

**Cold Front**

**1** Cirrus: If well-developed, and lower level winds are indicative,\
cirrocumulus will develop quickly.\
**2** Cirrocumulus: Indicator, if following lowing cirrus by a few
hours.\
**3** Altocumulus or altostratus: Look for frosted appearance and
lowering of ceiling.\
**4** Stratocumulus: Immediately before storm clouds. Sometimes this
will be the first cloud seen and will stream in by rows parallel to the
wind; common in winter **5** Cumulonimbus in summer, nimbostratus in
winter; herald the arrival of the front.\
**6** After front passes, some cumulus may remain.

**Warm Front1** Cirrus: May be very thin at first Land may persist with
other cirrus forms for several days.\
**2** Cirrostratus: Will move across 2 a and cover the entire sky.\
**3** Cirrocumulus: May develop the 99 classic "mackerel sky" of
ripples.\
**4** Altocumulus: A deck of expanding ing, thickening clouds.\
**5** Altostratus: May see red skies in 59 western sunset or in west at
sunrise.\
**6** Nimbostratus, occasionally cumulonimbus; the heaviest
precipitation of the warm front.\
**7** Stratus: May develop as the front Z passes and continue light
precipitation for several days.

**Eleven Important Cloud Formations and What They Bring**

**A. Cumulus congestus**\
*Description:* Cumulus starting at low altitude, turning gray,
billowing, and beginning to develop vertically. *Weather:* May produce
precipitation immediately.

**B. Cumulonimbus** *Description:* Towering, angry-looking, billowing
cloud varying from white to dark gray. *Weather:* The severe weather
cloud, which may bring high winds and thunderstorms.

**C. Stratus** *Description:* Usually lighter gray, low-level, flat
layers. *Weather:* Heavy precipitation if wind is from between northeast
and south.

**D. Cumulus** *Description:* Separated, fluffy, white clouds.
*Weather:* Fair weather unless developing into other cumulus.

**E. Cirrocumulus** *Description:* High, white layer of puffy or rippled
clouds. *Weather:* Precipitation in 15 to 20 hours if wind is from
between northeast and south.

**F. Cirrostratus** *Description:* High, transparent, white clouds that
put a halo around the moon. *Weather:* Precipitation in 15 to 20 hours
if wind is from northeast.

**G. Stratocumulus** *Description:* Light-to dark gray, variable tone,
low-level layers. *Weather:* Precipitation soon.

**K. Nimbostratus** *Description:* Light to darkgray monotonal,
low-level cloud layers that obscure the sun. *Weather:* Precipitation of
long duration if wind is from between northeast and south.

**I. Cirrus** *Description:* High, lacy, white ice cloud; often hairy
appearance. *Weather:* Fair if lower-level wind is from west.

**J. Altostratus** *Description:* Medium-height layer of gray,
translucent clouds. *Weather:* Precipitation in 10 to 15 hours if wind
is steady from between northeast and south; overcast for other winds.

**K. Altocumulus** *Description:* Medium-height, white to light-gray
layers. *Weather:* Precipitation in 10 to 15 hours if wind is steady
from between northeast and south.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-0)

High- and low- pressure systems
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-1)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-2)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-3)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-4)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-5)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-6.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-6)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-7.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-7)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-8.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-8)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-9.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-9)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71362-10.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix006.html#a71362-10)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter008.html}

::: body
# [Fantasy Solar Cabin](#toc.html#chap-8) {.chapter-title}

**Outfitting an antique barn with solar capacity, including the basics
of photovoltaics, and the future of photovoltaic companies.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**August/September 1991**

***A 19th-century hunting lodge joins the 20th-century with an
up-to-the-minute, custom-designed solar\
array.***

Over the past 93 years the Selway Lodge has gone through several
transformations. Built in 1898. the lodge was the centerpiece of a
100acre cattle ranch and sawmill deep in Idaho's Bitterroot wilderness
area, reachable only by fourteen miles of trail or a rather exciting
bush plane ride. By the 1920s, the many cabins scattered around the
property (regularly visited by bear, cougar, elk. and deer) served as a
summer hunting and fishing, retreat. Though the property shrank in size
when a good chunk was sold off to the Forest Service, the housing
complex expanded: Two houses, a dorm, and several outbuildings were
added to accommodate the growing number of visiting outdoor enthusiasts.

Despite the growth, the lodge continued to rely on a primitive
hodgepodge for its energy needs: gas generators: kerosene lamps: and
propane-powered refrigerators and stoves, the fuel for which had to be
flown n in regularly at great expense and danger.

Last summer, the Selway Lodge entered the 21st century. The owner. Pat
Millington, sprang for a \$22.000 solar array (including a Couple of
Sunfrost refrigerator/ freezers) to provide all of the lodge's (minus
the two houses') energy needs. The entire package was installed over the
course Of a couple of days by Sunelco, an alternalive-energy company
located in Hamilton. Montana.

The project Lot a running start before it even got off the ground:
Several weeks of preparation and pre-assembly assured success before
some seven plane loads, of equipment took off into the wilderness. The
Millington's chose a system using Solarex 60-watt solar modules. These
modules (what we see as "panes" of solar-activated material) were
mounted on Solarex mounting, structures. Four six-module structures were
then bolted together with a set of top and bottom plates.

Soon the arrangement was moved into place and bolted securely to the
building's rafters. The array was divided into two subarrays, each with
its own individual charge controller-important for preventing overcharge
of the batteries. Two fused disconnects (fused on/off switches) provided
complete flexibility and safety-both the array power and batter\\ power
can he individually disconnected.

Sixteen batteries (350 amp-hour fork-lift type) were employed-lour in a
series to yield 24 volts with four sets in parallel to yield 1400
amp-hours of storage-but hecause of the distance involved between the
cabins and the battery bank, all of the loads were designed to operate
on 120 volts AC

Necessity and convenience were factors in the decision to add two
inverters, which convert DC electricity to 120 VAC electricity. First.
the Lodge demanded maximum reliability. If one unit were to fail, the
lodge could be run off one inverter. Second. the Lodge boasts some 30
light fixtures as well as refrigerators, kitchen appliances, and a
washer and dryer-so it became necessary to separate the loads. One
inverter was chosen to handle the lighting while the other took on the
heavier power users. The benefit? None of the lights dimmed when a large
motor started. Though separating the loads in this way is not crucial,
Pat found this a good solution to the constant "browning" of the Lodge.

With no moving parts, and a maintenance schedule that only requires
watering the batteries three times a year, the Selway's system is
stunningly simple. Perhaps its greatest asset is its cost-effectiveness.
Pat expects to recoup her investment in five to six years; after that,
the Selway Lodge array rides for free. The batteries are expected to
last 10 to 15 years, the solar panels at least 30.

But the solar solution provided more than just economic relief. During
the threemonth summer season, about 30 bottles of propane had to be
flown in. And in case of an accident, needless to say, the Millington's
would have been their own fire department. "Between the fumes and the
spills," says Pat, "I'm surprised the lodge has stood for as long as it
has." Pat also got the chance to replace two older gas refrigerators
with two 19 cubic-foot refrigerator/freezer units. This again reduced
the propane consumption and greatly expanded food-storage space.

Now with lighting in the main lodge, dinner time is a much more, well,
enlightening experience. Admits Pat: "I do miss dining by those kerosene
lamps, and the old conversation our walls have heard many times before."

Just a few years ago, solar power made sense only for remote
hideaways-and then only if buttressed by a backup system. "Today," says
Dan Brandborg, owner and president of Sunelco, "photovoltaics can
provide up to 90% of the annual energy needs of a house almost anywhere
in the country." And since photovoltaics are quickly becoming an
economical source of electricity for the power companies, why not beat
them to the punch?

### ABC's of PV {.level3}

To understand photovoltaics, you have to understand electricity.
Envision a piece of metal such as the side of a car. As it sits in the
sun, the metal warms. This warming is caused by the excitation of
electrons, bouncing back and forth creating friction, and therefore
heat. Add a mechanism (say a solar cell) to control the flow of
electrons and voila! Electricity. Oversimplified, perhaps, but PV boils
down to one simple act: the flow of power.

Now that you know electricity, you can understand how PV power flows.
First you have the source of PV power, the sun. It's abundant, it's
cheap, and it's everywhere; all you have to do is harness it. Enter
solar cells. Capable of generating 50 watt-hours of electric power, they
sit in the sun and generate power as they warm-simply, quietly, without
moving parts or byproduct pollution.

This power then flows through a regulator and into the battery bank.
Batteries are the heart of a PV system. They store almost all the power
the system delivers. The one drawback to this "power storage" unit is
the amount of power loss associated with all batteries-roughly 15 to
25%. They "self discharge" a portion of the power they store; for
example, if you charge a battery with 1000 watt-hours, you will only
receive 800 watt-hours when discharging.

After a battery is charged, though, power can be used day or night,
through sunshine and clouds. DC power (the type of power needed to
illuminate a lights can to used directly from the battery, traveling via
regulator (to control flow to and from batteries) and a fuse box (for
overload protection and safety). AC power (used for heavy-duty items
such as a dishwasher) can be accessed by means of an inverter. Simply,
the inverter converts DC (battery) electricity to 120 VAC electricity.
Now you can operate just about any electrical item in the house by means
of PV power!

But is PV for you? Maybe. If you live more than half a mile away from a
utility line, PV could be cost-effective. The initial cost of a solar
electric system is usually less than the power companies charge for line
extension. If you are on utility power at present, PV is not a
cost-effective move. Utility power is much cheaper than PV power. Why?
"Because we have not yet begun to pay for the externalities of fossil
fuel and nuclear generating plants," says energy expert Les Clawson,
"Power costs will escalate down the road. We are already starting to
take a tax hit for damage caused by acid rain, global warming, and
nuclear waste disposal. Once you figure in the costs incurred by
environmental damage, it's easy to see how costly utility power will be
in the future. It'll be more than double your power bill every month."

PV is also competitive when compared to other alternative power sources
such as wind- and hydropower. While harnessing wind and tapping a
waterfall can be good sources of power (provided you have yearround
dependable access to a windy ridge or a river with a healthy flow of
water and good vertical drop), solar has the advantage of sunlight being
fairly universal and PV arrays having no moving parts to wear and
eventually fail.

The most prevailing case for photovoltaics may be the diversity of
reasons to invest in it. First, of course, are the economies of
producing power in remote locations. Second, the security of having a
home power supply. Third, PV allows power consumers to take a personal
stand on environmentally threatening issues. And fourth, well, as PV
owner Bob Owen put it, "I just wanted to get away from that damn
generator noise." Sounds good to us, too.

### Sunelco {.level3}

**PV company sees a sunny future.**

Montana's Dan Brandborg was pay ing attention when experts saic that, to
improve the health of the economy, one should focus on the produc tion
of "value-added" products. This typi cally involves taking a plentiful
inexpensive local resource and converting it into something more useful
and, hence more valuable.

Historically, in Montana "resource" meant timber or minerals, but
Brandborg had his eye on something more environmentally benign than the
blockish clearcuts near his cabin in southwestern Montana. His research
told him that the most valuable and abundant resource in the "Big Sky
Country" is-well, sky.

Today, Brandborg's business, Sunelco Inc. (the Sun Electric Company),
sells solar electricity systems that enable hundreds of people around
the country to take a plentiful resourcesunlight-and transform it into a
highly useful product: electricity.

What's more, by selling solar panels, those slabs of silicon that
convert sunshine into electricity, Sunelco has quickly become a
prosperous example of the new wave of "green," or environmentally
conscious, low-impact businesses that communities are seeking.

The principles of solar electricity, or photovoltaics ("PV" in industry
shorthand) have been known for decades, but because of high costs and
relatively low efficiency they didn't come into their own until the U.S.
space program put them to work. The same qualities that made solar
electricity attractive to NASA in the '60schiefly its flexibility and
its reliability in extreme conditions-make it an attractive choice for
people seeking self-sufficiency.

Sunelco's founder grew up in an environmentally aware family. Fascinated
by the potential of solar energy, Brandborg worked two years in Maryland
for Solarex, the nation's largest manufacturer of solar panels. Then he
saw an opportunity to bring that experience out west.

"When I worked for Solarex all their sales were to the western United
States, " he recalls, "so I thought, 'Why couldn't we do this from
Montana?"' Soon he and his wife Becky were trying just that.

Setting out in the fall of 1985 with just \$4,000 in start-up money, he
put together a mail-order catalog and started designing and shipping PV
systems to customers throughout the West.

Since then Sunelco's gross sales have doubled every year. Working at
first from his small cabin up Tin Cup Creek, Brand borg soon expanded to
a tiny office in nearby Darby, Montana. Now Sunelco has six fulltime
employees, kept busy answering the constantly ringing phones and
designing, shipping, and sometimes aiding in erecting PV systems.

Their growth is due in part to the PV industry finally coming into its
own and achieving a new level of sophistication. When Brandborg first
began learning about solar panels there was a limited pool of people to
talk to. "I read two good books on photovoltaics," Brandborg says of his
education, "and in two years I knew more about it than most people in
the industry, mostly because I played with it."

He still plays with it and his home on a tree-lined residential street
in Hamilton is a model of what PV has become today. A fixed array of
roof-mounted PV modules, invisible from the street, keep the batteries
topped up. A heavily insulated refrigerator/freezer with a
high-efficiency compressor shares kitchen space with the gas cooking
range. Hot water is provided by a "Copper Cricket" solar hotwater
system, supplemented as necessary by a tankless gas water heater.

Brandborg, a "learn-it-by-living-it" solar junkie, monitors several more
meters than are absolutely necessary in a normal house setup so that he
can keep meticulous records of energy production and use. It's that
hands-on knowledge that Brandborg finds valuable when helping customers.

Brandborg designs systems that will meet a customer's realistic demands,
rather than trying to change or limit that demand. New installations are
more complex but much more versatile. The standard components of a
system include the solar panels, a bank of batteries, and an inverter
which converts the 12/24-volt DC current from the batteries into the
110-volt AC on which most household appliances run.

Running a house on solar electric power involves a few compromises, most
of which relate to energy storage. "I have to check the batteries pe
riodically," homeowner Dick Fichtler reports, "and it doesn't have
unlimited power. When we designed the system - we didn't anticipate some
loads, like running the vacuum cleaner so often." Keeping track of the
state of the charge in the batteries and topping them off with an
alternative power source if necessary helps him avoid any problems with
the PV system.

The key is to shift high-demand uses away from electricity to other
resources whenever possible. Space heating, cooking, and even
refrigeration can usually be accomplished with propane. All other
electrical demands need to be as efficient as possible.

Although Sunelco is fielding an increasing number of inquiries from
customers with access to power lines, PV systems aren't generally
competitive with utility rates-yet. For now, the typical customer for a
solar electric system is someone with a remote cabin or vacation home.

Home systems aren't the only use for solar electricity, though. Sunelco
has helped ranchers take advantage of PV systems to pump water to their
livestock in remote pastures and to provide the juice for electric
fencing. Recreational vehicle owners are buying PV systems to run their
lights and TVs, without the annoyance of a noisy generator or the cost
of a hookup. Brandborg and his design team have even put together a PV
package that was mounted on an oceangoing yacht.

While the demand for PV systems is increasing, it's still a relatively
small market, and Brandborg doesn't foresee any dramatic price drops
soon. Awareness, not price, is what he counts on to bring new customers
to Sunelco. As evidence, he cites one study of Portland residents in
which solar power was chosen by 86% of the respondents as their first
choice for providing additional power in the future. Another recent
nationwide poll showed that energy efficiency was more important to
move-up home buyers than location or schools.

"People love solar," Brandborg smiles.

Because of that, the Brandborg's continue to cope with the surprising
growth of their company. Photovoltaics were not a sure thing back in
1985, and since then the field has become crowded with other start-ups.
But a "sure thing" isn't what drew Dan Brandborg into the business. It's
simply what he wanted to do.

"We just got on a different road, and hoped it would bring people to
us," he said, surrounded by solar panels awaiting shipment. "I had no
idea it would end up like this."

-Russ Lawrence

Editor's note: For more information on Sunelco, write Sunelco, PO Box
1499, Hamilton, MT 59840-1449, or call tollfree 1-800-338-6844.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71364-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix007.html#a71364-0)

The lodge's solar array can see the Selway through 10 sunless days.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71364-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix007.html#a71364-1)

Sunelco's Dan Brandborg checks the battery power of the Selway Lodge.
The 16 batteries yield 1400 amp-hours of storage
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71364-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix007.html#a71364-2)

A bird's-eye view: The Selway Lodge (hero houses, a dorm, and many
cabins) serves as a summer hunting and fishing retreat
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71364-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix007.html#a71364-3)

""I read two books on PV, and in two years, I knew more than most people
in the industry."" Sunelco's Dan Brandborg.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter009.html}

::: body
# [Wilderness Living in British Columbia](#toc.html#chap-9) {.chapter-title}

**Author's story of homesteading in British Columbia.**

**By Deanna Kawatski**

**August/September 1991**

By Deanna Kawatski

***At one time or another, all of us have thought of starting over in
some wild, green corner of the\
world. the Kawatski family has done it-and they have a remarkable story
of self-sufficiency.***

Tucked away among the mountains in a northern corner of British
Columbia, a handhewn log home sits like a speck of propriety in the
wilderness. Despite the logs, it's quite an elegant home with its dormer
peaks and big windows looking down from a clearing on a hillside to the
neat vegetable garden below. But just beyond the tidy house and
clearing, the wild roses, columbine, and yarrow scramble over the
hillside in summer. And in the neat garden itself, a creek frolics like
a truant through the straight rows of hardworking cabbages and potatoes
and onions and carrots.

Across a field, a blond, bearded man my husband, Jay\--drives a gaggle
of crabby geese toward a fresh patch of horsetails. I am nearby,
harvesting rhubarb with my eleven-year-old daughter while my young son
looks on. This is no hobby for us. It is our way of life, and has been
for the past seven years. My family and I live in the wilderness, 120
miles from the nearest town.

I wasn't born to this life; I adopted it. I grew up in Kamloops, British
Columbia, went to the university there, and then spent eight years
seeing the world, mostly large cities like London, Berlin, and Paris. I
tried hard to adapt to big-city life. In London, I was a nanny for twin
boys. In Berlin, I had a job building harpsichords. I drank tea with the
proud Afghanis before the Soviet invasion, and visited India, where I
saw the human spirit soar above famine and poverty.

Short, intense bouts of tree-planting in British Columbia financed most
of my wan derings abroad. It was a schizophrenic existence. One month I
would be dressed in lace, sipping cafe au lait at a fancy sidewalk cafe
in Paris. The next month, I was standing on some obscure Canadian
mountainside, with my clothes caked in dirt and a mattock in my hand,
planting trees for tomorrow.

But my serious move to wilderness life began in 1978, when the B.C.
Forest Service hired me to be the first female lookout attendant at the
Bob Quinn fire tower, 120 miles north of Stewart-a tiny town near the
Alaskan border. The prospect of spending three months alone on a
mountaintop terrified me, but I needed the money. I also had enough
solitary pursuits-writing, yoga, and reading-to keep me busy. I intended
to explore my surroundings as much as possible. Wanting a little
company, I acquired a husky pup in Stewart.

While in Stewart, I heard stories about the wild hermit who lived in the
Bob Quinn Lake area near the fire tower. His bare feet would inevitably
beat a path to my door, people said. His reputation as an unpredictable
barbarian left such an impression in my mind that when I bought a buck
knife it wasn't with the bears in mind.

The Bob Quinn lookout sat on a mossy rock at 4,310 feet, just above the
tangle of alpine fir at the treeline. In every direction, as far as the
eye could see, was wilderness. Mountains stood on three sides and I
could see the Iskut River flowing for 100 miles down a valley. There
were white ice fields to the west, and the Iskut burn, a grey
100,000-acre beast, sprawled to the north. Far below, the unpaved
Stewart-Cassiar highway raised dust plumes when trucks passed.

The shack I was to call home for the summer had a single room with 23
windows. The fire finder, a heavy platform with a map and a revolving
scope, sat in the center of the room. All the furniture-mot, cupboards,
table, oil stove, and fridge was at crouch level so nothing would
obstruct the view. Heavy cables secured the shack, none too securely, to
the mountain.

During the day I often stared south at Bob Quinn Lake, with its island
in the center, and from there to Desire Lake, 11/2 miles farther south.
Here, rumor had it, the hermit lived in an octagonal log cabin he had
built himself. Each clear night, I watched the sun set into mountains.
After dark, I'd go outside to see Venus, the dippers, and Orion, hanging
like delicate buttercups in a field of sky. I found that I enjoyed my
solitude and felt freer than I ever had before.

One foggy afternoon, as I sat at my table writing, I saw two human
figures emerge from the mist. I opened the door and invited inside what
turned out to be two young boys on a hike from the nearby highway camp.
A few moments later, more company arrived-two older boys, a black lab,
and a nanny goat. Last but not least came the legendary hermit, who
introduced himself as Jay. I felt no fear as he smiled at me. After all
the wild stories, I was almost disappointed by how civilized he was.

His blond hair and beard were neatly trimmed. He was slim and fit with a
luxurious mink and otter cape on his shoulders and a marten cap on his
head. He even wore boots.

Jay told me he was from Wisconsin originally and had been in British
Columbia for 11 years. He was 31. In pursuit of a lifelong dream to live
in the wilderness and master his own fate, he had followed the
uncompleted Stewart-Cassiar highway as far as he could. He had put in a
hard first winter alone in a dingy cabin on the shore of Bob Quinn Lake
while he searched the valleys and forests for a suitable building site.
Spring found him on the shore of Desire Lake.

THE DECISION TO HAVE MY BABY IN OUR wilderness home on Desire Lake was
not an easy one. I was 29 and this was my first baby. If anything went
wrong, it was a 11/2-hour hike through the woods and a 120-mile drive
over a potholed road to the nearest hospital. On the other hand, I've
always been healthy and I have a husband, Jay, whose years of solitary
living have taught him not to panic in times of danger.

During my pregnancy, I visited my doctor five times. They assured me
everything was fine. So Jay and I carefully prepared ourselves for the
birth. I practiced breathing techniques and relaxation, kept up my
exercise, and ate a good diet. Even toward the end, a hike of eight
miles was nothing unusual.

As I should have realized, though, there is no way to plan life around
nature. Like many first-time mothers, my due date, June 15, came and
went. To make matters worse, there hadn't been any rain for weeks and I
was getting worried about our garden. It was in the valley two miles
away where we were building our new cabin. At this stage, I didn't want
to be alone while Jay went off to tend the vegetables, so on June 18, we
both hiked to the garden.

We worked there all afternoon and evening, thinning and watering the
lettuce and beets. In the evening, as we sat eating supper beside the
open fire, I noticed that my tailbone was sore and it was impossible to
find a comfortable sitting position. Having only stumps and ground to
sit on, of course, didn't help things much.

We slept on boards in the half-finished cabin that night, then on June
19 worked in the garden again. The sun beat down on us, and it was a
great effort for me to move from row to row. When we sat down by the
river to rest, I suddenly realized we had no time to lose. We had to get
back to our cabin immediately.

It took strength to climb that first great hill out of the valley, a
steep rise of 200 feet. It was like climbing 20 flights of stairs while
in labor. Then, after another 100-foot hill, I felt a sudden burst of
warm liquid down my legs. I knew that the amniotic membrane had burst.
It was 5 p.m., and the contractions began with two miles of rough trail
to go.

Wilderness life is no genteel retirement. An endless round of pioneer
chores keeps the family on the go from sunup to sundown.

When the waves of painful contractions forced me to stop, swarms of
mosquitoes crawled into my eyes, ears, and nose and bit me without
mercy. But I also vividly remember the masses of butterflies that kept
exploding from the trail ahead of us.

Two hours later, filthy and exhausted, we reached the cabin. I lay down
while Jay flew into a blizzard of activity. He chopped wood, started the
fire, fed the animals, fetched and heated water, made dinner, cut up the
three gallons of rhubarb he had packed back form the valley, and
massaged the small of my back when the pain became too severe.

I squatted and tried to keep control by panting, but suddenly I was
possessed by such a strong urge that I found myself growling like an
animal and pushing. Before I knew it, the baby's head was through. I
pushed some more and the rest of her slithered out, followed by the
glistening cord.

I screamed as Jay appeared to fumble and drop her. He was actually
whipping her around to get the cord off her neck. She was a moonstone
color and her head was so pointed I couldn't help but wonder what planet
she was from.

Jay quickly sucked the mucus out of her nose and mouth and she began to
kick and cry. He laid her across my stomach and I massaged the vermix
into her skin. To my amazement, she hoisted herself up on elbows and
knees, threw her head back and looked into my face. It was 5:20 a.m. and
all was well. The strength of her cry assured us that Natalia had made a
safe crossing from the spirit world.

-Deanna Kawatski

Year by year, Jay had learned more about hunting, about gathering and
preserving food, and about living in equilibrium with the beautiful, but
uncaring, land. He taught himself wood carving and became adept at
sewing skins and weaving moose hide into snowshoes.

Five days after Jay's first visit, he was back with some homemade
huckleberry jelly, rhubarb wine, and a tiny chair that he had carved.
Thus began our friendship. When I saw the red canoe crossing Bob Quinn
Lake, far below, I knew that I could expect Jay within a few hours. For
the chance to see me, he would make a round trip of 19 miles-15 miles
hiking, 4 miles paddling. The final trail up the mountain to the lookout
was very rugged, a near-vertical rise of 2,500 feet.

At the end of the summer, I visited Jay's octagonal cabin on Desire
Lake. Sun streamed through a bay window where tea roses grew. Wolf skins
hung on homemade furniture. Books, carvings, and wooden toys lined the
shelves. I enjoyed, in particular, the wooden owl whose wings rose up
when a towel was hung on the hook at its base.

The following summer, I returned to the fire tower once again. To make a
long and romantic story short, we were married that fall.

In November, I began my initiation into bush life. In some ways the
transition was easy. Even when I lived in cities, I usually chose
walking over riding buses, and was used to covering miles on foot. But
now, hiking was a way of life; we are three miles by a boggy foot trail
from the highway, and we also go on long rambles near home.

I think that the hardest part of the transition, apart from loneliness
and not being able to flit off on a whim, was adjusting to the short
winter days. In the past, it had been so easy to flick a switch, but
here we had no electricity. And when the days finally stretched and
warmed, and I could peel off my winter clothes, I was attacked by every
size and shape of insect imaginable. When it comes to wilderness living,
if anything can knock someone from an idealist to a realist in 10
minutes flat, it is the bugs.

In June 1980 our daughter Natalia was born in the cabin beside Desire
Lake. The next spring we moved to the rich, alluvial land in the
Ningunsaw River Valley. I had felt a real sense of peace at our home on
Desire Lake, but we could never grow a decent garden in the acidic,
weed-choked soil there.

Our new home sits in a clearing that we carved from the thick jungle on
this beautiful 300-acre river flat. The Ningunsaw River, a tributary of
the Iskut, flows east to west through the center of our valley, and the
giant spruce, balsam, and cottonwoods there can make us feel as small as
gnomes at times. In season, even the stinging net tles, cow parsnips,
and ferns tower over our heads. On one side of the valley, a peak we
simply call South Mountain rises to an altitude of 6,000 feet, and Rocky
Mountain goats live on its high ridges.

At first, we slept in the 12 X 16-foot kitchen. During the day, we moved
an entire hill with sweat and shovels so that we could build our 21 X
34-foot addition. We now have two stories plus an attic.

We are the first settlers in this valley. Even the Indians chose areas
farther north or south, where the salmon are. We began by squatting on
the land, but now have a license of occupation from the government. That
means we pay taxes but have official permission to stay here.

0ur family of four lives on between \$2,000 and \$3,000 a year. Jay
makes \$2,000 to \$2,500 a year form his wood carvings and does a little
tanning for local trappers. We earn \$660 a year keeping weather records
for Environment Canada and also trade some of the vegetables from our
three-acre garden.

Out here, I've learned the pleasures and frustrations of dog sledding
and snowshoeing. I've learned the bitter realities of using the outhouse
at -30°C-or worse, during the bug season. I've learned patience during
the endless fall rains.

Bit by bit, we are engineering a few small luxuries. Until recently, the
closest thing we had to running water was me descending to the creek
with buckets. Now a gasoline pump eliminates the tedious and exhausting
chore of hauling those five-gallon pails of water up a steep 40-foot
slope. We have a cold-water tap right in the kitchen and eventually will
have a hot-water system as well. Also in our plans is a water wheel, to
give us electricity for more precious light in winter.

We subsist on wild meat, with domestic chickens, rabbits, and geese to
supplement it. We never shoot more than one moose a year, and we use
every part. We boil down the bones for soup stock, and make the skin
into rawhide.

Our lives are tightly governed by the seasons. During the warm months,
we're busy growing and storing away food for the winter. Our garden
provides us and our animals with all the vegetables we need. Last year,
we harvested 1,755 pounds of potatoes and 1,050 pounds of carrots. We
also grew parsnips, peas, cabbage, lettuce, broccoli, cauliflower,
spinach, brussels sprouts, onions, garlic, strawberries, rhubarb,
raspberries, asparagus, celery, and parsley. Our root cellar keeps our
produce fresh until the next growing season.

The endless round of pioneer chores often prevents us from going on
casual hikes. Even as I write this, I am hustling off every few
sentences to split and carry in wood, to feed the fire, to carry laundry
to the creek, and to put water on the stove.

I also have a great deal to wash, all by hand, in spring. I move my
laundry down to the creek to enjoy the sunshine and mountains as I
scrub. I use wool gloves inside rubber gloves to protect myself from the
icy bite of the creek water.

In the snowy months, I have more time for projects like writing,
knitting, sewing, and stitching slippers from some of the hides that Jay
has tanned. Jay spends may hours carving. Our daughter learns her three
R's through a correspondence course, and in her spare time, she shares
our artistic enthusiasm for carving and making things. We all find ample
time for other kinds of learning too: Every moment we are surrounded by
nature, the greatest teacher on earth.

Winter also allows us more time to explore our wilderness. During the
day, the frozen river becomes our highway and we travel on foot, on
skis, or by sled. Jay uses a snowmobile to haul firewood and supplies.
During the long winter nights, Jay and I often take turns reading books
aloud.

Our lifestyle is not for everyone. Each person has to choose his or her
priorities. For me, a relatively pure environment is more important that
a world of gadgets. We delight in the wilderness around us, and in the
comings and goings of animals, weath er, and seasons. But people who
don't understand still shake their heads and say that we live "in the
middle of nowhere.

" We also value the self-sufficiency that comes with our pioneer life.
Sometimes, as I look out at the clothesline and see diapers, blinding
white in the sunlight and washed on the scrub board in the tradition of
my grandmother, I imagine her smile of approval. I experience a sense of
accomplishment. And when I watch our cupboards fill up with jars of
berries, pickles, meat, and trout, and know that they will see us
through to the next harvest, there is a satisfying feeling of security.

Granted, it is difficult to live without friends and neighbors. So we
sometimes dream of a friendly community springing up around us-people
who share similar ideals. Unfortunately, most people who come north are
a transient breed. They seem to be holdovers from the gold rush era, and
they want to head north, strike it rich, rape the land, and flee south
again to the rewards of civilization. Meanwhile, we'll continue to live
in harmony with the wild, respecting the thousand and one creatures,
understanding our own insignificance in the great scheme of things and
loving this land that we have chosen to call home.

*Jay and Deanna Kawatski gave up the city lights for a handmade log
cabin in northern B.C., 120 miles from the nearest town. Their family*
of *four lives on less* than \$3,000 a year.\

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-0)

Jay and Deanna Kawatski. Right: The Kawatski homestead near Bob Quinn
Lake, British Columbia.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-1)

Deanna (above) cooks for the family on a cast-iron stove while Jay (top)
prepares a rabbit hide for tanning. Son Ben never lacks transactions in
the workshop.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-2)

The Kawatski's root cellar (above) overflows with carrots, potatoes, and
turnips. Jay carries grain bundles (top) tied to the handle of his
shovel.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-3)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-4)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-5)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71366-6.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix008.html#a71366-6)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter010.html}

::: body
# [Robyn Van En: The First Lady of Community Supported Agriculture](#toc.html#chap-10) {.chapter-title}

**A Plowboy Interview with Robyn Van En, who, along with Jan VanderTuin,
promoted the idea of selling shares for farm crops before the season
started.**

**By Joel Bourne**

**August/September 1991**

*It all started in 1985 on a small but fertile piece of bottomland
tucked at the foot of the Berkshires in southwestern Massachusetts.
Robyn Van En, organic market gardener and owner of Indian Line Farm, and
Jan VanderTuin began to grow apples and winter-storage crops for a group
of 30 families and friends. But instead of taking the financial risk of
growing the crops and selling them to the group, the two sold shares of
the harvest before the season started. The idea wasn't exactly new -
VanderTuin had worked with a similar group in Switzerland, and there
were others in Japan. It was, however, the first of its kind in the
United States. They called their system Community Supported Agriculture
(CSA).*

*In 1991 the Indian Line Farm CSA served more than 300 people and became
the model for nearly 50 CSAs across the country. Van En, likewise, has
become the leading voice for what she sees as a saner, more sustainable
form of food production that supports local growers. Her CSA workbook
and VanderTuin's video, It's Not Just About Vegetables, have laid the
ground work for many of the groups. Inquiries from every state in the
union have poured into Van En's 200-year-old farmhouse.*

*CSAs foster the symbiotic relationship between farmers and consumers.
For farmers, they provide a guaranteed market for the crop while
relieving them of much of the financial risk. For the shareholders, they
provide fresh, organically grown vegetables at supermarket prices, plus
a fundamental connection to a local farm.*

*Mother's Joel Bourne decided to pay Robyn Van En a visit to find out
what the last five years have brought her, and what the next few years
may bring.*

***It's been five years since you started the Indian Line Farm CSA;
since then, the concept has blossomed all over the country. But just for
the record, why do you think we need Community Supported Agriculture?***

The Northeast is dependent on California and the Southwest for 92
percent of its produce, and that is insane. California can't go on
forever. They're losing their water. They've salinized the land to
incredible proportions. California can still give us oranges and
avocados and lemons, but there is no reason why we need to get
everything else from there, too. Right now, by doing just the most basic
gardening and using a root cellar for storage of root crops, we can
provide vegetables for 43 weeks of the year.

CSA creates a direct connection between the people who will be eating
the food and the people who are growing it. We've been so separated from
our food in the past. When you buy a quart of milk, there is something
like \$.86 between what the farmer gets and what you pay. And those
middlemen aren't farming.

In New Zealand the farmers are really cherished. In China they are the
most honored citizens. They feed the people. It's really logical. And
the farmers in this country - well, it's just the saddest thing. I see
Community Supported Agriculture as a way to empower people on an
individual basis, then on a community basis, and eventually, on a
regional, national, even global basis.

***Where did the idea for CSA originate?***

The philosophy has been at work in Japan and Western Europe since about
1965. The first groups were established by mothers, the main caregivers
at home. In Japan they saw the increase in food imports and the loss of
arable land. It was logical that it should happen in Western Europe,
too, where the farmers are geared toward cooperative work. In
Switzerland, for example, three or more farms may share the same
equipment. One person will be the first to get his hay in one year, and
the next year he'll go to the bottom of the list. When you are
diversifying all the capitalization, the maintenance of the equipment,
and the work, it's to everyone's advantage to help each other.

With CSA, it's sort of the same thing. This way, everything goes to the
sharers. They own the harvest. They've advanced you money and gone
through any risk with you, and so they realize any bounty with you. For
this to work, you've got to be very committed to your community and your
community has to be the same to you.

"The only way we survived in the first place was as tribes. The only way
we'll survive in the future is as united communities."

***Tell me about your first year.***

In the fall of 1985, I was in a staples-buying club and the group said,
"We'll buy anything that you can grow, Robyn." Right there I had
eliminated a marketing hassle, but I still had all the capitalization,
all the risk, and all the work to contend with. I grew mostly
winter-storage crops: garlic, onions, potatoes and carrots.

Then Jan came along. He had been in Switzerland and was involved with
the startup of one of the CSA groups outside of Zurich. We talked for
about five minutes, and I said, "That's exactly what we need here."

***Did you ever have any doubts during that first year about the success
of the CSA?***

I don't think I ever felt that it couldn't happen, because it's just so
logical. In the first year, you go with your immediate friends and the
people you're most in contact with. The third year is a little more
telling. That's the rule of thumb in any business, because you exhaust
your immediate supply of friends and then their supply of friends.

***So you started out with 30 families?***

Yes. They were getting a bag of vegetables twice a week and that turned
out to be too often for most people; each bag weighted an average of
five to seven pounds. So the next year, we made it just once a week, and
larger families could still get a bag twice a week if they wanted.

Even in a drought, there are certain things that you can mulch, certain
things that will tolerate the drought, and certain things that, if
you've got a limited water supply, you can give that bit of water to. If
you had three acres of lettuce out there, you'd be out of luck. There's
no way you could take care of it in a drought like we had in 1989.

It would take just short of a major flood to wipe out everything we
grow. One year we had a rainstorm that dropped eight inches of rain over
South Egremont in three hours. It totally flooded out our winter squash
patch. But that turned out to be about \$30 of the \$600 share price,
when it would have been a \$3,000 loss to a typical farmer, which would
scuttle a lot of farms. A farmer near here lost \$95,000 worth of
potatoes in the floods last spring, and almost that much in squash.

***But how much actual risk is there for the shareholder?***

It depends on how many shares make up the group. With 85 shareholders,
each person risks one-eighty-fifth of the budget; this year, that's
\$340. It's stated right in the prospectus; they are in the risk and
sharing in the bounty. If they don't feel they get enough, they won't
sign up again the next year. But it depends on how you look at the risk,
too. When you eat produce from most grocery stores, you're taking a risk
from all the chemicals used to grow it. One thing we are trying to do is
educate shareholders about what farmers are up against.

***Are there people who support the group out of sheer altruism?***

There are definitely people who really believe in it. A local artist
told us he would donate paintings to raise funds, and one of our
shareholders, who is in the fabric business, donated muslin for bags.

***What are your shareholders like? Are they urban or rural?***

We've got all kinds. We have some people who are just curious about
vegetables. They don't care about any of the politics, and they might
not even realize the social statement they're making by supporting a
local community farm that uses alternative methods of agriculture. They
may not realize the impact it will have. We're supplying 35 families
from the Boston area, and I've got a list this long of people in New
York City who want shares. Even if these people only saw the farm once a
year they still would have a connection. It's still a more regional
agricultural system than one that comes 3,000 miles across the country
day after day.

***Can you really produce fresh, organically grown vegetables at
supermarket prices?***

So far it has been cost competitive. The supermarket food is coming from
California and the Southwest. I don't know how they've been getting it
here so darn cheaply. But with all the petrochemicals they use to grow
their produce and the petroleum it takes to get it across the country,
that price is really going to change.

My intention with the groups is to design something that can be
duplicated anyplace in the world. And on any financial scale. I think
this model should be in Nicaragua, in Bangladesh. I've done this whole
farm with virtually no money at all.

***How viable are CSAs for people with a small plot of land who want an
extra or even a main source of income?***

It's not like anybody's going to get rich on it - unless there's really
a shift, which I think could happen. But just determining your budget
and selling your shares to meet that budget makes it a viable situation.
If you don't sell all your shares, you cut your budget. That's happened
to us before. I'll tell you though, the one response I've heard over and
over has been, "This is so logical. Why haven't we always been doing
this?"

***Are there limitations of scale?***

The smallest project I know is in eastern Pennsylvania where a fellow is
doing 12 shares on a quarter of an acre with a Rototiller. The biggest
one I know of, in Japan, feeds 1,000 families and supports 14 farmers.
They're getting all their fruits, vegetables, miso, tofu and fish from
this committed consumer group's connection to this committed production
group.

There are other ways to do it, too. I was just talking to a group in
Williamstown, and this guy came up and said, "God, this is the best
thing I've ever heard. But my wife and I have 60 acres of rocks." I
said, "Well, do you have any maple trees? Do you have anything that you
can be farming that you can connect with this group?" He says, "You
know, we do have maple trees." And I said, "There! Put in some bee
boxes."

When you get one of these projects going, you have this captive audience
that you're working with and educating in the process. We're going to be
networking with a guy here who makes maple syrup. There's another guy in
Sheffield, right over the hill, who raises totally organic beef. He
grows all the feed for them - wonderful stuff. These people have access
to our sharers to educate them with their information, and the sharers
are free to get in touch with them.

***How far can you take it?***

Somebody asked, "Well, what about the community supported auto
mechanic?" What if everybody signs up for an oil change and a lube and
pays their \$30, signs up for when they're going to be in, and then the
mechanic can go out and buy the lift he wants or put the down payment on
it?

***So CSAs are more than just a means of putting fresh, organically
grown local vegetables on the table. You're rebuilding communities
here.***

The basic intention is to raise the social status of farmers in a
community. The only way we survived in the first place was as tribes -
small communities, if you will. The only way we're going to survive in
the future is as united communities. If they shut off all the power
tomorrow, where are you? You've just got your immediate community to
work with. If there is no more gas -

***You've got your neighbor.***

You've got your neighbor. And you'd better know who your neighbor is and
what you can do for each other.

***Where do you see CSAs in the future?***

Ten years from now I think they're going to be everywhere -I mean,
really everywhere. Every prison should have a CSA feeding the prison and
the community around it. Every housing development should have a CSA.

Communities should have lots of farms around them. This is the only
earth we've got. And it's owned by a handful of people. It's only going
to get more and more precious. Arable land is a much better thing to
leave our grandchildren than a bunch of time-share condos.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71368-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix009.html#a71368-0)

CLEMENS KALISCHER

Robyn Van En surveys the bounty of her CSA's labor. Her dog, Bubbles,
seems less interested.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71368-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix009.html#a71368-1)

CLEMENS KALISCHER

CSA members harvest carrots as part of their duties.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71368-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix009.html#a71368-2)

CLEMENS KALISCHER

Shareholders receive organic produce, as much as seven pounds each week,
for supermarket prices.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter011.html}

::: body
# [Your Basic Tool Kit](#toc.html#chap-11) {.chapter-title}

**Tools, like friends, are best when sharp, enduring and well
balanced.**

**By Len Parkin**

**August/September 1991**

When, as a first-time home owner, I had to borrow things to get the
simplest household jobs done, it wasn't long before I assembled a
half-dozen or so hand tools that would take care of just about anything
that cropped up. Now that I've put together a moderately impressive
workshop, I still look to that core group of old reliables for quick
fixes in and around the house.

There's something to be said for the luxury of being able to carry most
of what you need in a small kit bag. For one thing, a fabric gripsack is
compact and inexpensive and can be left packed so you're never in doubt
as to what's inside. Moreover, a bag is considerably more supple than a
toolbox and has no sharp comers to suffer or lids that refuse to close.
Finally, because there's only a handful of items in it, there's little
worry that things will get buried at the bottom.

Linemen often use a leather carryall that's just about perfect for this
purpose; more realistically, local and mail-order surplus retailers
usually have military engineers' bags or tool grips available in canvas
for less than \$10. I use an oil-stained nylon athletic bag my wife
discarded last year. At any rate, it's apparent that there's no need to
get fancy. The bag should be at least as long as your largest tool,
needn't be wider than 8" or so and no more than that in height. Try to
choose a design that has top handles, a closable opening and a stiff
bottom with metal feet.

The three portable power tools covered later in this article have their
own carrying cases or at least can be carried separately. And though
their convenience can't be argued (unless you happen to be somewhere
without power), it's sometimes easier, often necessary, and almost
always more satisfying to simply do the job by hand.

### Setting Out to Buy {.level3}

I'm by no means an elitist, yet when it comes to tools, I try to buy the
best I can afford-within my ability to use them. If the biggest mistake
is to spend good money on junk tools, the second biggest is to spend
even better money on superb tools you don't really need. The dollars you
save may allow you a greater variety when you put your package together.

Fortunately, it's not all that difficult to spot quality when it comes
to tools. Finish, feel, and attention to detail will separate the
cosmetic marques from the working brands, even if you're ignorant of
reputation. Generally, you'll find that the old name brands remain
reliable, though newly imported lines (especially among higher-priced
Japanese, German, and English products) easily rival our traditional
"Yankee" quality. In short, you get what you pay for, and if you shop
carefully, you may get even more.

For general maintenance, it's possible to spend less than \$100 and
still assemble a good cross section of honest, working hardware. For
half again as much, you can com plement your selection with additional
tools chosen to match your specific needs. The listing below certainly
isn't carved in stone, but it reflects a choice made from experience,
and one that can be easily fine-tuned to your own pleasure.

**HAMMER:** The 16-ounce curved-claw wooden hammer may be an American
classic, but it's not the one I would choose for my one and only. For
starters, those pretty wooden handles can break too easily; second, a
one-pound head just isn't meaty enough for the heavy-duty framing and
whacking jobs that sometimes come up.

My all-time favorite hammer is a 22ounce rip-claw framing hammer with a
solid steel handle and a mill-face head. The extra six ounces of weight
puts some authority into the swing without being unwieldy. The same goes
for the 3" or 4" longer handle common to the framers. Though many
professionals swear by hickory-wood handles, it's more because they tend
to absorb shock than because they're particularly bulletproof.

A steel slender-shank handle covered with a nylon grip is almost
perfectly balanced and nearly indestructible, and shouldn't wear down
your wrist and forearm unless you're beating with it 10 hours a day.
Some other handle choices are fiberglass and tubular steel, but you
should make your decision based upon how it feels in your hand.

Curved-claw hammers are fine if you pull nails all day, but the
straighter rip claw will pull nails *and* sink its fangs into wood, so
it works as a pry bar, too. And though there's certainly nothing wrong
with a smooth-faced head, the mill-face or "waffle" design grips the
nailhead at once and tends to send it home straight. It's also great for
dry wall or framing work when you want the head of the nail set slightly
below the surface.

**SCREWDRIVERS:** In my workshop tool cabinet, my mainstream
screwdrivers are square-shank, plastic-handle models: one 1/4" flat
blade, a 3/16" flat blade, a No. 1 and a No. 2 Phillips head, and a
small instrument screwdriver with a 5/64" square-ground blade. If you
want to carry five screwdrivers around, they certainly won't be a
burden, but consider buying one spiral ratchet driver instead. You'll
recognize it by the crosshatch grooves in the shank and the knurled grip
collar near the tip.

My choice would be a better quality 10" domestic or imported model; the
bargain types aren't a bargain at all. The best thing about spiral
ratchet screwdrivers is that they turn clockwise (or counter-clockwise)
as you pump the handle. A spring feeds the shaft outward automatically
once you push it in, or the shaft can be locked in position if you like.

Some brands of ratchet screwdrivers have a hollow, chambered handle to
store the bits, which include 3/16" and 1/4" slotted blades, a No. 2
Phillips blade, and two or three drill bits from 5/64" to 9/64". If you
plan on driving a lot of screws that require inordinate levels of
torque, consider buying a bit for your electric drill; if not, the push
screwdriver should suit nicely.

**PLIERS:** For some reason,I really haven't used a pair of common
slip-joint pliers in years, probably because it's been that long since I
purchased my 10" curved-jaw locking pliers. For hand-gripping or
twisting they work as well as the slip-joints, but for crude wrench work
their lockjaw bite is far superior. With the curved jaw, they fit pipes
as well as square bars and will exert enough pressure to serve as a
clamp or small vise if you need one. I like the 10" ones because they're
large enough to do some damage, yet still fit comfortably in one hand
for detail work. These are the ones you shouldn't do without.

**SQUARE:** For some, using a square might seem a bit fussy, but it's a
necessity if you do any building project and want the job to turn out
right. The handiest one for me has been the combination square, which
obviously enough combines several functions. This design has a stock
with a perpendicular edge and a 45° miter edge. The stock slides along a
12" steel blade and can be locked in any position with a drawbolt for
use as a marking gauge. There's a spirit (bubble) level built into the
stock, and often a removable marking scriber, too.

The great thing about this tool is that it's fairly accurate in all its
functions, though that might be optimistic in the case of the level.
Look for a 1 "-wide blade that incorp orates a 12" graduated ruler, and
a milled steel stock (a die-cast head is a good second choice).

**CHISELS:** It's inevitable that someday you'll be forced to mortise a
doorjamb or pare down a furniture tenon. When that time comes, a chisel
is about the only tool that can do the job right. Paring chisels are too
delicate and precise to suit a wide range of home-improvement
challenges, so what you most likely want is a small set of butt
chisels-comfortable in the hand yet tough enough to beat with a mallet
when the need arises. For deeper or heavier work, there are mortise
chisels (straight sided with noticeably stout blades) and their larger
cousins, firmers (long and very substantial, with blades 2" wide or
more).

Depending upon what you want to spend, a good starter set would include
three or four chisels, ranging in width from 1/4" to 1" (the smallest
size would probably be omitted from a three-piece set). The blades will
be bevel-sided and-if this information is available-tempered to a
Rockwell hardness of 58 or so to assure a good balance of resiliency and
edge-holding characteristics. If you want plastic handles, be sure
they're designed to take hammer blows; wood-handled designs should have
impact caps for the same reason (some boxwood handles are meant to be
struck only with wooden mallets, though). Buy by the set and you have a
good chance of getting a protective pouch in the bargain; you'll need it
to keep the edges sharp.

**SAW:** Even if you use a circular saw for the lion's share of
around-the-house projects, you'll want a decent handsaw to take care of
close work in tight places. At the bench, a backsaw or trim saw does
nicely but you want one that fits comfortably in a 16" bag. Some pruners
or folding saws would probably suffice, but my choice is a Japanese
Dozuki with a removable blade. I don't know what *Dozuki* means, but to
me it translates as a modified hacksaw with an aggressive tooth pattern
that somehow makes an exceptionally clean cut. Many Dozukis have a full
back frame and a thin blade with 20 to 28 teeth per inch, but for
general use, keep your eyes peeled for a thicker, coarser blade with 12
or 14 teeth to the inch. Its added rigidity allows the use of a short
back frame so the blade can pass fully through the work, and the teeth
are designed to cut on the pull stroke for smooth, bowfree action. Total
length is about 20-1/2", but that's reduced by half when the 9-1/2"
blade is unscrewed from the handle.

**ADDITIONAL ITEMS:** The halfdozen core group is a substantial
foundation on which to base your portable workshop. But as you tackle a
variety of repairs, it'll become painfully apparent that it wouldn't
hurt to enhance your collection as different needs arise. A good steel
measuring tape is worth every bit of the \$10 you'll probably pay for
it. The 16' size is about the shortest I'd buy, and I prefer the 3/4"
width to the 1/2" because it stands unsupported for a greater distance.
A friction-reducing coated blade and a functional locking mechanism are
two musts.

Sooner or later, a utility knife should be part of you pouch. There are
several good retractable models, but the fixed blade with storage built
into the split handle is more durable, though you'll need some kind of
sheath for it.

Don't be surprised if you discover that a pair of needle-nose pliers
with a built-in side cutter and wire stripper are pretty convenient for
minor electrical work and for setting springs and hooks. Buy only the
best quality, preferably with insulated handles and a straight-jaw
design. The smaller 5" size will answer to most jobs, but I pre fer the
8" pliers because they offer good leverage and still allow a firm
purchase even on small parts.

A file is right handy to have around, but you really need several
different types of varied bite. The answer for me is a four-in-hand,
sometimes called a horse rasp, after one version of the tool. It's an 8"
or 10" file about 1-1/8" wide, with one side half-rounded and the other
flat. Most designs include a coarse and medium rasp and a coarse and
medium file to cover most general jobs.

Preparation for painting requires the use of a scraper, and the most
functional kind I've found looks like a small, flat pry bar. It's
commonly called a ship scraper, but really doesn't resemble the navy
scraper, which was designed to be struck with a hammer. Actually, it's a
modified beekeeper's hive tool and can be used as a pry, nail puller,
chisel, scraper, and pinch bar. Most are about 10" long, and all have
one straight and one curved end. Quality varies with this tool, so look
for a name brand with resilient steel that can be sharpened with a file.

The last item to fill your tool bag ought to be a standard cold chisel.
If you're buying just one, choose a 1/2" or 5/8" tip. But several
manufacturers offer attractively priced sets of chisels and punches,
which make household metalworking jobs a lot easier.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71370-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix010.html#a71370-0)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71370-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix010.html#a71370-1)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter012.html}

::: body
# [Three Essential Power Tools](#toc.html#chap-12) {.chapter-title}

**The hazards of first time shopping and picking the right tool for the
job, including drill, circular saw and router.**

**August/September 1991**

Issue \# 127 - August/September 1991

By Ceylon Monroe

One school of thought on carpentry holds that no one should use power
tools before mastering hand tools. The logic is hard to dispute: Hand
tools demand patience, leaving time to contemplate methods and
materials. With a power tool, intimacy is lost; things happen fast, and
fine boards can be turned into kindling in no time.

I agree with the hand-tool argument-to a point. Anyone who plans to
become a professional should probably observe it. But for the occasional
carpenter, logic can be a limitation. An example: Back in my formative
days as a wood butcher, I believed strongly in the superiority of hand
tools for quality work and would argue beyond the point of absurdity
about their efficiency. I often suffered for my pigheadedness.

One summer, my father-in-law-a meticulous craftsman who (horrors) used a
circular saw for just about everything and I were re-siding my
turn-of-the-century farmhouse. The requisite 6" bevel-lap siding wasn't
available, so we were faced with ripping 2" off the proud side of
8\"wide boards. Ever ready to prove my point, I wagered that I could
slice a 16' board with my Pax 5-1/2-point ripsaw quicker than he could
do it with his sidewinder.

To make a painful story short, I won the contest (by the barest of
margins) but didn't argue when he suggested we resolve the issue by
taking the rest of the boards to the shop for a pass through the table
saw. That night, my beer bottle grip was far less tenacious than usual.
Mind you, I still love that handsaw, and I can still cut a straighter
line with it, but I've learned (if sometimes begrudgingly) to accept the
place of power tools.

### Power Tool Basics {.level3}

For the person planning to only occasionally use a power tool, it may be
tempting to buy a discount store bargain. Why should an amateur pay the
premium for a tool built to last a lifetime in the hands of a
professional? Because more than durability separates fine tools from
cheap ones. Functional design, power, balance, and other details can
help the less skilled do a better job with less effort. It certainly
isn't neccessary to buy the best, but do try to afford tools that will
become your allies, not your enemies. And exactly what attributes should
you look for?

Start with power. Because manufacturers use different systems for
describing the power output of their tools, motor ratings are difficult
to compare. As a result, it's best to ignore horsepower output ratings
and look at an amperage input at full load, as listed on a tool's
Underwriters Laboratory required label. The useful power output of a
tool is equal to the amperage it draws minus losses to inefficiency.
There are differences in efficiency, but they're seldom larger than 10%
and are usually much less. In particular, beware of any claim that a
tool "develops" a certain amount of horsepower. This sort of advertising
copy is based on amperage draw as the tool bogs down; it's not
indicative of sustainable output. The listed amperage is the best, if
still imperfect, indicator of power.

Bearings may be the most significant sign of actual tool quality. Less
expensive tools have sleeve bearings; better tools have roller or even
ball bearings. The type of bearing is particularly important on the
motor's output side, since this bearing handles the majority of side
loads. An electric drill with sleeve bearings, for example, will work OK
as long as you use it only to drill (a thrust load). Chuck a rotary
grinder bit into it, though, and the plain bearings won't last long
under the side load. Tools with roller or ball bearings are also more
pleasant to handle, since they run smoother and quieter.

Most portable power tools built in recent years are double-insulated.
All electrical conductors and junctions inside the tool have a second,
backup layer of insulation to prevent electricity from reaching the case
if the machine should short internally. You can recognize a
double-insulated tool instantly because it will have a two-prong plug
without the round ground prong. Double insulated power tools are highly
recommended-for the sake of safety and convenience.

The latest power-tool technological de velopment is electronic motor
control: a digital circuit that maintains constant rpm. This is a
significant theoretical advantage on a drill, a circular saw, or a
router, since it prevents the operator from slowing the tool below a
desirable speed by overloading it. Electronic control is hardly
essential, however, and a skilled operator has little need for it. Weigh
the added convenience against the increased cost and complication.

### Electric Drill {.level3}

The first tool to consider is an electric drill. This most practical of
all power tools comes in a wide range of motor sizes and in three
different common chuck sizes: 1/4", 3/8", and 1/2". For general work,
choose one with a 3/8" chuck. The smallest chuck is suitable only for
detail work, and the largest for heavy work with large bits.

A 1 /2" drill may eventually become part of your workshop, but it's too
clumsy, heavy, and expensive to be your all-around drill. (Don't buy a
small drill with a 1/2" chuck expecting a do-all tool; one with a motor
smaller than 4.5 amps won't have the power to handle big jobs and will
burn out quickly if used that way.) Likewise, though a battery-operated
drill makes a very useful second drill, it won't take the place of a
workhorse 3/8" plug-in drill.

Unless you plan to do nothing but drill holes in one kind of material
with one size of drill bit, buy a drill with a variable speed-control.
The system is more complicated than a simple on-off switch-and therefore
slightly less reliable-but makes it possible to perform a variety of
drilling tasks and even to drive screws.

Don't buy a drill that isn't reversible. You'll want the ability to
remove screws, and reverse is the only way short of pliers to remove a
badly struck drill bit.

For a starting collection of bits, look for a twist drill set made from
high-speed steel (HSS) that covers sizes between 1/32" and 1/4" in 1/32"
increments. Twist drills are made to punch holes in metal but will do
for almost any material. Then pick up spade bits (for drilling wood)
between 1/4" and 1" in 1/8" increments. Spade bits are comparatively
crude wood borers, but they're cheap and get the job done.

Mind you, I still love that handsaw, but I've learned to accept the
place of power tools.

### Circular Saw {.level3}

Variously known as the contractor's saw or by the trade name belonging
to the first company to build one, Skilsaw, the circular saw is the
mainstay of carpenters. Equipped with the right blade, it will crosscut,
rip, saw panels, slice metal, or grind away masonry. Placed upside down
in a workbench, it will even make an acceptable substitute for a table
saw.

There are more than a half-dozen different blade diameters for circular
saws, but the most common is 7-1/4", which gives a cutting depth that's
well suited to the lumber commonly found in homes. There are two
different types of circular saws: the worm drive and the sidewinder.
Worm drive saws have the blade in front of the motor, instead of to the
side, and are uncommon except in the hands of framing carpenters. Though
they have some advantages over sidewinders, their extra weight,
complexity, and cost make them impractical for amateur use.

Mind you, I still love that handsaw, but I've learned to accept the
place of power tools.

Look for roller and ball bearings in a saw with a motor rated at least
10 amps for medium duty or 12 to 13 amps for heavy cutting. The larger
motor will run another \$20 to \$30 but may be well worth the cost if
you plan to cut wide joists, rafters, or the like. Any 7-1/4" circular
saw should have an arbor speed of at least 4,500 rpm to make smooth
cuts. You may actually find some of the more powerful saws rated at
lower speeds than less powerful ones simply because they slow down less
doing their work.

Any quality circular saw should have an ample base plate to make it
secure on the work, a lower blade guard that's easy to lift up to start
certain difficult cuts, angle and depth adjustments that are secure yet
easy to change, and an unobstructed line of sight to the point where the
blade contacts the work. (To guide the saw on a line, use this reference
point, not the notch on the front of the base plate.) A spindle lock
makes it easy to change blades. Other extras might include such safety
features as a switch lockout, to prevent accidental start-up while
you're carrying the tool, and a brake.

When you buy your saw, get a carbide-tipped blade with 24 to 30 teeth.
These are usually called general purpose or combination blades because
they give a reasonably smooth crosscut and will handle all but the most
difficult rips. Expect to pay \$20 to \$30 for a good one. Later, if the
need arises, you can pick up a panel-cutting blade for plywood, a
hollow-ground planer for very smooth crosscuts, or a specialty blade for
steel or masonry.

It may sound a bit odd, but another thing to look for in a circular saw
is a good cord. Bargain saws typically come with a 6' or 8' wire that
makes free movement very difficult if you're plugged into a wall outlet
or a multiple-outlet box on an extension cord. It's the sort of
frustration that leads to cutting one's own cord, something almost every
initiate is sure to do\--proving dramatically the virtue of double
insulation.

### Router {.level3}

Though the electric drill and circular saw are unarguably the first
tools to buy, the third item on the list is a little harder to choose.
If your plans include any furniture or an appreciable amount of trim
work, a router is probably the right choice. I, however, bought a belt
sander before I got my router. Back when I'd yet to realize that the
siding on my house would have to be replaced, I stripped the whole house
with that sander. Still, I've decided to recommend a router because,
when needed, it's just plain indispensable. A belt sander, on the other
hand, is merely an awesome labor-saver; maybe you'll make it number four
on your list?

Using a selection of different bits, a router can round over, bevel,
joint, groove, edge, rabbet, and form a variety of trim profiles.
Revolving at 20,000 to 25,000 rpm, the bits give an incredibly smooth
cut. As long as the edges are sharp and the tool is handled properly,
nothing but finish sanding will be required. Placed upside down in a
bench, a router will even do a fair imitation of an ex pensive shaper
jointer. There are three com mon collet (chuck) sizes for bit shanks:
1/4", 3/8", and 1/2". Small routers live the 1/4" collet, medium and
large ones have the 1/2"-with adapters for 3/8" and 1/4". Thus a 1/2"
collet can accept the smaller, less ex pensive bits for light work, but
the little ma chines use only the 1/4" shanks.

Most full-time carpenters keep two routers on hand: a small one (1/4"
collet with about a 6-amp motor) to do light rounding over and beveling,
and a big (1/2" collet) plunge router to handle mortises, dadoes, and
other major cuts. That's over \$300 worth of routers (at discount) and
about that much again in bits-way too much money for a parttimer to
spend.

Probably the best compromise is to buy a router with about an 8-amp
motor. That's enough ponies to handle anything up to a 1/2"
rounding-over bit in one pass, and it's just large enough to use
inverted in a router table. At the same time, it's small enough and
light enough to be reasonably easy to handle.

A router ought to fit you like a good pair of gloves. The handles should
be comfortably spaced, and the on-off switch should be accessible
without moving your hands. (However, the switch should be shielded to
prevent you from bumping it accidentally.) Except for long, straight
cuts, most people prefer two handles of equal size rather than the
D-handle arrangement. Check to see how easily the base and motor move up
and down to adjust the depth of cut; at the same time, make sure that
you can see the bit at various depths. In many operations, it's crucial
that you have a clear view of the bit at work to know where to stop, and
some routers make this difficult.

Nine-tenths of my routing work is rounding over (sometimes called
beading) edges on window, door, and cabinet trim. After going through a
trash-canful of under \$10, HSS rounding-over bits, I finally bought my
first quality carbide bit with a pilot bearing. What a difference! It
cuts far bet ter, is less likely to burn the stock, and shows no sign of
dulling after a year of use.

Carbide bits cost four times as much, but last far more than four times
as long. Now, as each of the HSS bits in my rig dulls, I replace it with
a carbide. And if there's a model with a pilot bearing available, I
cough up the extra cash.

Handy bits for remodeling include 1/4", 3/8", and 1/2" rounding-over;
1/4", 1/2", and 3/4" straight cut; 1/2" cove; 3/8" rabbet; and 45°
bevel. You can economize on this list by buying an arbor (a shaft with a
bearing and locknut) and then picking up specialized cutters as you need
them. Whether you want to stock them all is mostly a matter of how hard
it is for you to get the one you need.

If, like me, you feel like a kid in a candy store each time you go to
the hardware store, you'll actually want to drag these purchases
out-revel in the choices, massage the tools, and daydream about what
they'll enable you to do. Tools can be a source of pleasure unto
themselves-not to mention a financially hazardous obsession-arid having
the right one is a joyful celebration of power.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71372-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix011.html#a71372-0)

Back the work with a piece of scrap to prevent the wood from tearing put
when the drill comes through.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71372-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix011.html#a71372-1)

To follow the line when sawing, be sure to watch the blade, not the
notch in front of the base plate.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter013.html}

::: body
# [The Fundamentals of Root Cellaring](#toc.html#chap-13) {.chapter-title}

**Root cellaring can help you enjoy fresh produce all year long.**

**By Mike and Nancy Bubel**

**August/September 1991**

Root cellars are as useful today as ever. In fact, root cellars in all
forms are very up-to-date, what with the costs of food and its
processing getting higher every year. As we see it, root cellars are
right up there with wood heat, bicycles and backyard gardens as a
simple, low-technology way of living well - independently.

The term "root cellars," as used here, includes the whole range of
ingenious vegetable-saving techniques, from hillside caves to garden
trenches. The traditional root cellar is an underground storage space
for vegetables and fruits. Where space and lay of the land permit, these
cellars are dug into a hill and then lined with brick, stone or concrete
block. Dirt-floored or insulated basement rooms - less picturesque but
probably more numerous - are also traditional.

What can root cellaring do for you? Simply this: make it possible for
you to enjoy fresh endive in December; tender, savory Chinese cabbage in
January; juicy apples in February; crisp carrots in March; and sturdy,
unsprayed potatoes in April - all without boiling a jar, blanching a
vegetable or filling a freezer bag. A root cellar can save you time,
money and supplies. How? For starters, our gas and electric bills were
lower because I was not heating 2-gallon kettles of water for canning, I
was stuffing less into the freezer, and I didn't need to buy new jar
lids or freezer bags.

Storage vegetables needn't be limited to those old standbys: carrots,
potatoes and turnips. With a really well-planned root cellar program,
fresh tomatoes, tender dandelion shoots, nuts, pears, sweet potatoes and
even cantaloupes can be preserved. Even if you must buy some produce,
you'll find prices of storage vegetables are usually lowest in the fall.
If squash is 25 cents a pound at a roadside stand in October, you can be
sure it will cost much more than that at the market in January.

More important, it is good to be able to provide for yourself, to be
prepared for the winter through your own skill and forethought with your
own home-grown produce. If you like to choose your food with care and
live simply and self-reliantly, perhaps root cellaring is for you.

### Root Cellaring Basics {.level3}

There are three basic conditions a root cellar should provide. The
closer you come to matching these ideal conditions in your
vegetable-storage area, the better your vegetables will keep.

**Root Cellar Humidity:** High humidity is essential to effective root
cellar storage. Most root crops and leafy vegetables keep best in
humidity of 90 to 95 percent. Providing plenty of moisture helps prevent
these foods from shriveling.

You can achieve the necessary humidity level in a root cellar three
ways. First, install a dirt floor, which will retain more natural
moisture than one made of concrete or stone. We recommend spreading
gravel on packed earth. This helps keep feet dry when the ground gets
really damp. Should the storage area need more moisture, you can supply
it by sprinkling the gravel with water, which - because of the large
surface area - will evaporate readily and fill the air with moisture.

Bringing us to the second way of keeping humidity high: Add some water
either by sprinkling the floor, spreading damp (but not dripping wet)
burlap bags over the produce or placing pans of water on the root cellar
floor. Such measures are often necessary in the fall, when you're first
storing produce. Basement root cellars are much more likely than dug-in
root cellars to need added humidity. In very moist areas, root
vegetables can be kept uncovered in bins, and they'll stay smooth and
firm. But if your humidity reading falls short of the ideal, you may get
better results with a third option: Pack the vegetables - especially
carrots, beets and parsnips - in damp sawdust, sand or moss; this cuts
down surface evaporation.

It's important to remember that cool air absorbs less moisture than warm
air. You get a pretty unstable situation in a place that's both cold and
very damp. A slight drop in temperature can cause air that, at 34
degrees Fahrenheit, say, has room for a bit more moisture, to suddenly
become fully saturated at 32 degrees. When this happens, you've reached
the dew point, and the excess water that the air can no longer hold
begins to condense on wall, ceiling and even vegetable surfaces. When
produce becomes wet, it's more likely to spoil - even at low
temperatures. To be safe, buy a hygrometer (a humidity measuring device)
at the hardware store.

**Root Cellar Ventilation:** Basically, air must be admitted then
monitored and circulated through a root cellar. Admitting air to the
cellar (as described below) helps keep the area at the desired low
temperature. Equally important, adjusting air intake helps to reduce
excessive humidity, thus preventing undesirable condensation. Air - set
in motion effectively - removes both vegetable odors and ethylene gas
given off by stored fruits, which might otherwise produce off-flavors in
other foods.

To understand how air can circulate through a root cellar, remember that
warm air rises and cool air falls. In a large or tightly enclosed
cellar, you'll need both an air intake and an outlet. The intake should
be low, and the outlet should be high; ideally, the two should be on
opposite sides of the room to best circulate the air. Cool air will
enter through the low intake, and warm air will be re leased through the
outlet. In a small storage area, or in one with many cracks where air
can enter (such as an old stone foundation), a single outlet placed high
to exhaust warm air may be sufficient. Always elevate crates a few
inches so that air can circulate underneath them.

**Root Cellar Temperature:** Your most important consideration. A good
root cellar can both borrow cold and keep cold. You borrow cold by
digging into the ground, where the temperature well below frost level
remains a fairly constant 52 F or so. This works because the deep-down
earth temperature is slow to be affected by ultra-cold surface
temperature, so your underground vegetables will have an extra margin of
protection. You can borrow cold by letting the night air into the cellar
either with a window or a closable exhaust pipe.

If you can maintain temperatures between 32 and 40 F, you have an
excellent storage place. A temperature range of 40 to 50 degrees will
still permit shorter-term storage of root vegetables and apples, and
will keep onions and some of the short-lived storage vegetables like
peppers, tomatoes and eggplant in good shape for a month or so.

In an indoor root cellar, the area close to the ceiling will be a few
degrees warmer than space near the floor, so you'll have at least a
small difference in conditions that you can take advantage of by placing
vegetables according to their different storage requirements.

A thermometer is essential for a well-run root cellar. One with
minimum/maximum readings will give you a good picture of the kind of
temperature variations you're working with.

### The Root Cellar For You {.level3}

The kind of root cellar you build or adapt will depend on the floor plan
of your house, the lay of your land and the temperatures and snow cover
in your area.

If you have an old house with an unheated, dirt-floor basement room,
you're all set. With slight modification, or in some cases none at all,
you'll have an ideal vegetable-storage cellar. In a house with a heated
basement, it's possible to partition off an unheated corner for
vegetable storage.

If you prefer an outdoor root cellar, you can either dig into a hill or
go straight underground and top the cellar entrance with a bulkhead
door, patio or porch. Most outdoor root cellars are dug into a
north-facing hill or are underground on the north (coolest) side of the
house. You'll find exceptions to this rule in some of the northern
states and Canada, where temperatures plummet well below zero in winter
and stay there. Some of the old-time outdoor root cellars in these areas
are built on southern exposures for easier winter access. Once winter
sets in, it's plenty cold there even though these cellars get more
sunlight than it seems they should.

If you live in an area where winter temperatures are often below zero
degrees Fahrenheit and snow cover is heavy, you may prefer climbing into
an under-porch storage pit to shoveling through drifts to get to a
hill-cave root cellar. Many underground root cellars (such as the one
detailed below) are built with an anteroom or double doors that form an
airlock, which helps keep warm summer air out of the cellar and also
prevents undo chilling of the produce in severe winter weather.

If your winters are mild, with average temperatures well over 30 F, you
won't be able to achieve the most desirable low temperature in your
cellar for keeping root vegetables. Those vegetables probably will keep
very well in the garden row, and the warm-keepers like squash, onions
and sweets should do fine in a cool corner of your house.

Many people opt for a 8-by-10 foot space or larger - but few can fill
them to capacity (a 5-by-8 foot space can hold 30 bushels of produce).
If you plan on keeping buckets of soil to store vegetables such as
celery, a 8-by-8 foot space should suffice. We recommend using multiple
shelves to maximize space. Use only rot-resistant woods, and slat for
good air circulation. Shelves should also have 1- to 2-inch cleat at the
back to keep edges away from the wall.

With a really well-planned root cellar, fresh tomatoes, tender dandelion
shoots, nuts, pears and cantaloupes can all be preserves.

### An Excavated Root Cellar {.level3}

As we mentioned before, there are many options when it comes to root
cellaring. But unless you're lucky enough to have an existing usable
structure or live in a warm climate where a garden row is a good choice,
you'll want to consider an excavated root cellar.

Dug-in root cellars work well because they are insulated by the earth
surrounding them. The soil is a poor conductor of heat, so the
temperature of the ground 6 feet under is cool and fairly constant. The
natural moisture of the earth helps keep humidity high. Since soil is
heavy, an underground root cellar should be strongly built. In addition,
because frozen, wet soil can expand and rupture walls, it's important to
provide drainage around the cellar to stop waterlogged soil from
freezing and caving in the walls of your cellar. The dug-in root cellar
root shown in the Image Gallery is divided into two parts for several
reasons: The small anteroom helps insulate the inner chamber from
extreme heat and cold and also provides a choice of conditions, allowing
your vegetable storing system to be fine-tuned.

Let's assume that you're lucky enough to have a north-facing hill, and
you intend to make a dug-in root cellar in the slope of the hill. You're
ready to begin, but how?

**Step One:** As you've surely guessed, your first step is to dig a hole
in the hill. You'll need to remove enough soil to make space for the
volume of the cellar you plan to build. It's no help to dig a hole much
larger than you really need, for all that space will have to be
backfilled. Dig deeply enough so that the footer will be below the depth
of the average frost penetration in your area. Most of the cellar will
be protected by soil. Dig down an extra 2 to 3 feet around the door
where the foundation will be most exposed to the cold. Fill with gravel
up to the base of the footer.

**Step Two:** Lay drain pipe from the floor drains in the cellar out to
daylight. The floor inside the root cellar should be a bit higher than
the level of soil outside the door so that water drains off.

**Step Three:** Pour the concrete footer. After the ground in the cellar
site is leveled, make forms from 2-by-8 lumber. The footer should be 16
inches wide for a concrete block wall and 8 inches wide for a poured
concrete wall 4 inches thick (in other words, twice as wide as the wall
will be). Technically, of course, the footer will be only 7 ¼ inches
deep, since that is the actual dimension of a piece of 8-inch lumber
these days. Put several reinforcing rods in the concrete poured over the
dug-out spot at the door. Let the footer cure for three to seven days
before proceeding with the walls.

**Step Four.** Start laying concrete blocks.

Since you've sensibly planned the dimensions of your cellar in multiples
of 8 inches (half the length of a standard concrete block allowing for
mortar joints), you should have no trouble here. Leave a gap for a
standard door. For vent pipes in side walls, either leave a gap between
blocks or chip one block. Your cellar should be from 6 ½ to 8 inches
deep.

**Step Five.** Make forms to support the poured concrete roof. The roof
should be reinforced with crossed and tied reinforcing bars as shown in
the diagram. The bars should be embedded in the bottom half of the
poured concrete roof. If they're too close to the surface, they don't do
much to strengthen the roof. The pour is made directly on
plastic-covered ¾-inch plywood, which is supported by joists resting on
beams, which are held up by 4-by-4 posts. You'll also need a form
running around the roof perimeter to hold the concrete ceiling until it
dries and hardens. Make this form out of 2-by-6 lumber and attach
supports at the corners and at least every 4 feet along the sides.
Without these supports, the weight of the concrete is likely to bulge
the forms and then drip through the gap. Why cover the plywood with
plastic? So that water from the concrete mix doesn't seep through and
drain off, weakening the concrete. A flat roof is easiest to build; just
remember to insert the exhaust and intake pipes in the ceiling form
board before you pour the concrete for the roof.

**Step Six.** Start to backfill around the cellar. Tamp the soil lightly
but firmly as you go. When the level of backfilled soil is still 2 to 3
feet below the projected soil surface height on the slope, insert a
perforated 4-inch drainpipe running across the entire back of the
cellar, bending around both corners and ending at daylight. The pipe
should rest on a 3-inch gravel bed and have a length of heavy roofing
paper or 6-mil plastic sheeting tucked partly over the top (but not
around it) to prevent silt from clogging it. The pipe should slope 1
inch across 8 feet starting from center back down both sides.

The purpose of this drainpipe is not to keep water out of the cellar,
but to prevent pressure on the rear wall of the root cellar from
expansion due to frozen wet soil.

Backfill with gravel above the pipe. If filling in manually, you can
place a board behind the pipe and gradually fill in soil behind the
board, pulling the board out every few inches.

**Step Seven.** Finish backfilling around the cellar sides. Later, you
may need to fill in with more soil as the disturbed ground settles.

**Step Eight.** Using construction cement, attach rigid 2-inch sheets of
urethane or Styrofoam to the exterior surface of the root cellar roof.

**Step Nine.** Spread a sheet of 6-mil polythylene over the insulation.

**Step Ten.** Cover the root cellar with 2 to 4 feet of earth. Plant
grass on the roof to hold the soil so it doesn't run off when it rains.

**Step Eleven.** Spread gravel on the root cellar floor (optional).

**Step Twelve.** Make shelves. Be sure to leave that 2-inch gap between
the shelf and the wall to allow for air circulation. Brace the shelves
with scrap wood as shown. Better not to make the shelves too deep, 16
inches should be plenty.

**Step Thirteen.** Insulate a standard door with 2-by-2 lumber nailed
all around the edge on the inside. Fit 2-inch Styrofoam inside this
frame. Cover the Styrofoam with Aspenite or similar paneling. If you can
maintain between 32 and 40 F, you have an excellent storage place.

In our own experiments with storing live winter vegetables, we
discovered a pleasure akin to the contentment of dressing by the warm
fire on a cold morning.

### Other Keys to Root Cellar Success {.level3}

Now that you know how to construct your root cellar, a few hints on how
to make the most of it:

**Accessibility:** The more convenient your root cellar is, the more
useful it will be to you. A root cellar that is close to the house, easy
to clean, well lit (a bare light bulb is fine) and handy is the most
satisfying.

**Canned goods:** Don't keep jars of canned goods in your main
vegetable-storage area. The level of dampness you need for your root
crops will rust the lids.

**Cooperative Root Cellaring:** As we discussed earlier, a space of
8-by-8 feet should be plenty for the average family. But consider
setting up a cooperative root cellar, with maintenance tasks shared by
several families. Building the cellar could be a joint effort, too. Or
one owner could accept produce and charge a small rent or accept
barters.

**Darkness:** An electric light is a big help when you go to plunder
your store, but between times, the root cellar should be dark. Light
deteriorates some storage vegetables. If you ventilate a basement room
by raising an outside window, be sure to shade it.

**Pests:** Close all spaces as tightly as you can to keep the mice out.
This means screening all vent pipes and windows and making sure the door
fits tightly.

**Storage:** The debate is crates vs. half-bushel baskets. Half-bushel
baskets are light in weight and easy to handle. Crates utilize space
more efficiently and they can be stacked. You decide.

In our own experiments with storing live winter vegetables, we
discovered a pleasure akin to the contentment of dressing by the warm
fire on a cold morning - the pleasure of delving into one's own store
for food to put on the winter table. As we shiver our way back to the
warm kitchen with parsnips in our pockets, a handful of potatoes and a
bag of carrots, we feel very good because we've managed to grow it and
to keep it. We wish each of you the same kind of satisfaction.

*Material in this article appears in Mike and Nancy Bubel's new edition
of* [*Root Cellaring: Natural Cold Storage of Fruits &
Vegetables*](http://www.motherearthnews.com/shopping/detail.aspx?itemnumber=539)*.
The book is available from [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Shopping, and
contains detailed plans for all types of root cellars, plus a number of
wonderful insights and tips.*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71374-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix012.html#a71374-0)

ILLUSTRATION: MONICA FORRESTALL

What can a root cellar do for your? It can give you fresh endive in
December; savory Chinese cabbage in January; juicy apples in February;
crisp carrots in March; and sturdy potatoes in April.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71374-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix012.html#a71374-1)

PHOTO: MICHAEL BUBEL

Co-author Nancy Bubel, cellar-bound with her garden's bounty
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71374-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix012.html#a71374-2)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS STAFF

If you can mantain between 32 and 40 degrees Fahrenheit, you have an
excellent storage place.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71374-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix012.html#a71374-3)

KEITH HEBERLING

These root cellar plans should get you started on your way to year-round
vegetable storage.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71374-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix012.html#a71374-4)

KEITH HEBERLING

Space between the shelves and walls allows fresh air to circulate around
the produce, thus preventing the produce from getting moldy.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71374-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix012.html#a71374-5)

KEITH HEBERLING
:::
:::

[]{#chapter014.html}

::: body
# [A Natural Playground](#toc.html#chap-14) {.chapter-title}

**August/September 1991**

Sunday Afternoon

BY THE MIDDLE OF SUMMER, THE KIDS HAVE swung on the backyard tire enough
times to qualify for frequent flier miles, and the wading pool toys you
bought have mysteriously disappeared into the pool's own Bermuda
Triangle. And somehow the treehouse you promised them last winter just
seems a little daunting, not to mention stressful (12 feet is a long way
down for a six-year-old; your nerves aren't that good). What to do? Toys
these days are outrageously expensive, easily broken, and unnecessarily
complicated. And with a month remaining until school starts, a Sunday
afternoon's investment in time can yield one or more of these natural
outdoor playthings, saving you lots of money-and lots of sanity.

**A HORSE SWING:** Check your wooded property for a young locust or some
other tree with a beautiful curve at its base. The bottom of the trunk
will make a sturdy and graceful swing.

To convert the trunk to a swing, first cut it and carry it to your shed.
Strip off the bark-quite an easy task while the wood is green. Then,
using a brace fitted with a one-inch bit, bore two parallel holes
through the swing-to-be's side, one at each end of the trunk.

Next, saw a pair of one-inch diameter lengths, each about eight inches
longer than the width of the log, from a straight hardwood branch. With
the bark removed, blunt the ends. The stubs should fit snugly in the
holes with an end protruding on either side of the log. Ropes are then
attached to the ends of the crosspieces to suspend the swing.

The hanging horse can be safely used by any child old enough to hold
himself or herself in place on it, and the height of the swing steed can
be easily adjusted to suit the length of the young rider's legs by
letting out or taking up the rope it hangs by.

**A PLAYING PLATFORM:** The next time you have to cut down trees near
your house, you might leave a little more stump than you ordinarily
would. These will make sturdy foundations on which you can build playing
platforms.

To begin, set a post in the ground at a point about six feet from two
serviceable stumps cut to the same level as the post. Then 2 X 4's are
spiked in place running from each stump and the post to form a
triangular base. Nail some old boards across these beams, and add a
small ladder.

Because this "platform" is shaded by greenery, it has the feel of a tree
house. It can be a pretend pirate ship, a goblin's cave, or a knight's
castle.

**BARK PIPELINES:** The remainder of the tree used to make the horse
swing can be stripped and cut into fenceposts, a process that will
produce a pile of curled bark. A four-year-old can construct a water
engineering project using these leftovers, and though such a homemade
aqueduct might seem just a toy, bark-strip conduits have been used by
pioneers and homesteaders for channeling water to a house.

**BARK BOATS:** Another project using bark will turn small scraps that
are 2 to 2-1/2 inches wide and 3 to 4 inches long into little Viking
ships.

First, use a nail to press holes into the bark at any points where you
want to locate masts. The uprights are made from thin sticks whittled to
a point on one end. Trapezoid-shaped pieces of paper or big leaves can
serve as sails. Just slip them onto the sticks and mount the masts in
the nail holes.

Add to any pond, pool, or lake and when you blow on the little sails,
the small bark boats slip prettily across the water. Throw in a few
acorns for buoys and you're off to the races! Don't be too surprised if
there are a few exciting capsizings to watch.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71376-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix013.html#a71376-0)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71376-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix013.html#a71376-1)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71376-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix013.html#a71376-2)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71376-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix013.html#a71376-3)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter015.html}

::: body
# [Know Your Community](#toc.html#chap-15) {.chapter-title}

**Getting to know a community from afar, getting involved and meeting
potential neighbors.**

**By Cliff Madison**

**August/September 1991**

### Easy ways to know a community, from afar. {.level3}

By Cliff Madison

YOU'VE FOUND YOUR PERFECT PIECE OF country, you've got the financing
lined up, and you're eager to close the deal. Then a nagging doubt sets
in: Is this really the community you want to live in?

Your concern is well founded. After all, this may be the place where you
spend the rest of your life, where you raise your kids, and make a
living. Every community has its good and bad points. Your goal is to
make sure the good ones outweigh the bad.

Here's my five-point plan for checking out the community you're thinking
of joining:

**1. Find the courthouse cafe or diner** where the town's movers and
shakers gather each morning before work to solve the world's-and the
town's-problems. Get a copy of the local paper, turn to the real estate
classifieds, and order a cup of coffee. Listen to the conversations
around you; try to tap into the circuit of what's on the minds and in
the hearts of people in the community.

This may seem like eavesdropping. It is. From careful listening, you'll
be able to tell if the local folks are interested in vicious gossip or
real community issues. After a couple of mornings, you might engage your
fellow klatchers in some easy conversation. Be careful, though: To them,
you're just another newcomer. They've seen \`em come, they've seen \`em
go. Don't try to impress them with who you are or the plans you have for
making sweeping changes in the town government. Don't give them any
reason to form a negative impression of you by spouting your own
philosophies right off the bat.

**2. Find out how helpful your rural neighbors may be** by going to,
say, a hardware store, wandering around, and asking your fellow shoppers
a couple of really dumb questions that will establish your country
naiveté. How helpful they are, how cooperative and supportive they are,
will give you a pretty good indication of how neighborly you can expect
them to be.

**3. Attend a town government meeting,** whether of the school board,
the town council, or the planning and zoning commission. Assess the
attitudes of the public officials (self-centered and political?
community-minded?), the level of adherence to procedure (are the
officials orderly or dominated by the chairperson?), and their
willingness to involve the citizens attending the meeting.

Things to observe at the meeting: Are some of the town officials not
paying attention? Are the discussions self-serving, or based on the best
interests of the community? Are decisions reached rationally, or based
on political expediency? Are the comments of private citizens taken
seriously by officials?

**4. Talk to a local newspaper editor.** Ask him or her what the local
controversies are, how one gets involved, and what civic clubs you can
join. Does the editor know of any major developments that might affect
your water supply? What's the local crime rate? Any problems with
schools, drug abuse, local feuds, political corruption? These are not
fun questions, certainly, but if they produce troubling answers, you'd
rather know them before you move than after.

5\. **Do any of the following:** Attend the church of your choice
(either on Sunday or on a Wednesday night) or the one closest to your
prospective property. This will help you understand the spiritual
underpinnings of the community.

Go to the local museum and learn what you can about the historical roots
of the community. Find out if the townspeople take pride in their
heritage.

Visit the library, thumb through local reference books, and talk to the
librarian about annual celebrations, festivals, and events.

Attend a meeting of the local volunteer fire department. No telling what
key revelations are available from this dedicated group of community
protectors.

All of this, of course, requires a thorough desire on your part to
really understand what the community is about. You may not want to join
a club, you may never attend a public meeting, you may have no desire to
run for dogcatcher.

But then again, as a community member, maybe you would.

Cliff Madison edited a small-town weekly newspaper for seven years.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71378-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix014.html#a71378-0)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter016.html}

::: body
# [Bathroom Compost Box: It's Not For Everyone](#toc.html#chap-16) {.chapter-title}

**By Christopher Nyerges**

**August/September 1991**

Last Laugh

A strange farewell to Roto-Rooter.

[By Christopher Nyerges]{.small}

SINCE THE MID-1970s,I have been affiliated with a nonprofit educational
corporation located in drought-stricken Southern California. Our
headquarters has long been afflicted with a troublesome sewer line that
would occasionally back up. After an intensive investigation, our
founder, R. White, deduced that the problem invariably arose after a
guest used liberal, nay, exorbitant, amounts of toilet paper. Instead of
investing in costly sewer repair or replacement, White decided to try a
different approach. He placed a 10-gallon plastic clothes hamper next to
the toilet (used regularly by about a dozen people) and hung a sign on
the wall commanding that, henceforth, all paper matter be discard in the
hamper. Use as much as you like.

Presto! No dirty clogs. No plumber's friends. Every few months the
contents of the hamper was buried, and it quickly decomposed.

As time went on we began conducting experiments with the hamper. We
added a layer of soil to the bottom and introduced a few earthworms for
good measure. The worms loved it in there. Apparently, it created an
amorous atmosphere for them: They bred profusely. Best of all, there was
never any "outhouse odor" from the hamper. Rather, when the lid was
lifted, the hamper smelled earthy, like rich soil.

Eventually it occurred to us to carry our experiment to its logical
conclusion: to see how long we could go without emptying the hamper. To
start, we added a small amount of soil to the bottom of the hamper,
accompanied by 85 earthworms and 17 wood lice (also known as sow or pill
bugs). We returned the hamper to the rest room and the test was on.

Days turned into weeks, then into months, as roll after roll of paper
was fed into our voracious hamper. It was never emptied, never moved;
occasionally, the paper contents were lightly compacted and small
amounts of water were dribbled in for the creatures entombed there. Yet
the hamper never seemed to fill. Nor did the atmosphere around it
suffer. Instead it released the same fresh, earthy smell as always.
Time, effortlessly, rolled on.

Four years later, we decided to release our findings to a small and
unsuspecting audience attending our company gala. In preparation for the
grand event, we'd stopped adding toilet paper to the bin a month earlier
and covered the top with a layer of soil.

When we displayed the hamper to our guests and explained what we'd done,
many were amused. Some were even excited. Several were actively
revolted.

To add suspense to our unveiling and to create a visual aid, one member
of our group, Timothy Hall, brought a large cement-mixing tub into the
yard and told the crowd that, as part of the experiment, he was going to
empty the bin and count the worms and wood lice that had managed to
survive in dubious captivity.

The audience was breathless with anticipation. One woman, when she
realized we were actually going to empty four years' worth of
accumulated used toilet paper at her feet, finally found her voice, "Oh,
no. No ...PLEASE don't empty it!"

Hall, undaunted by her cries, slowly poured out the contents, while the
crowd watched in grim fascination. The first identifiable object to
emerge was a foot-long avocado seedling that had sprouted from a seed
inadvertently tossed into the bin. Gradually, the rest of the contents
flowed into the tub, and as the crowd pressed forward, it began to move,
writhing and turning like a living thing. As everyone gazed at the
spectacle, Hall declared, "There are thousands of worms here-more than I
can count!" Along with immature and adult earthworms, the tub contained
countless eggs, wood lice, and may other bugs and insects that we
couldn't identify. An entomologist's dream come true! The odor was fresh
and claylike. At the very bottom of the hamper was a dense layer of
material that was devoid of worms or life. But the rest was like rich
potting soil. There was no sign of toilet paper anywhere.

Our experiment was an overflowing success. Not only did we no longer
have clogs, but, without the paper, we were able to flush the commode by
pouring recycled water into the bowl, thus increasing our water savings.

Now that we've endured five years of drought here in Southern
California, I think of that hamper often. Hard times require innovative
measures.

*Christopher Nyerges, formerly an outdoors columnist for the* Pasadena
Star News, is the author of three books, including Urban Wilderness.
:::

[]{#chapter017.html}

::: body
# [Making Compost and Using It](#toc.html#chap-17) {.chapter-title}

**By Susan Sides**

**August/September 1991**

How to make it and how to use it: 7 tips for success.

RURAL AUTHOR WENDELL Berry once wrote of the farmer, "He has seen the
light lie down in the dung heap and rise again in the corn." These words
have sharply clarified for me the agricultural lifecycle-or even better,
light cycle. Plants convert solar energy into food for animals
(ourselves included), Then the wastes from those animals, along with
dead plant and animal bodies, "lie down in the dung heap," are
composted, and "rise again in the corn."

This cycle of light is the central reason that composting is such an
important link in organic food production: It returns solar energy to
the soil. In this context, such common compost ingredients as onion
skins, hair trimmings, eggshells, vegetable parings, and even burnt
toast are no longer seen as garbage, but as sunlight on the move from
one form to another.

By making use of such substances, composting enables us to have large
amounts of "dung" for our gardens without necessarily passing most of
the ingredients through an animal first. It also greatly speeds up the
earth's own soil-building processes to achieve results in months instead
of centuries.

The benefits of using compost are so great that it's no exaggeration to
call it the key to soil fertility. The end product of composting is
humus, the broken-down organic matter that is the basis of soil life. In
a single teaspoon of fertile soil, there are billions of microorganisms
that perform numerous functions. They change nutrients into a form your
plants can use, provide an ongoing flow of that food, and bind earthen
particles into small aggregates, helping to build a friable soil.

Other composting benefits:

Controlled pH. Acid or alkaline soil can lock up many nutrients, making
them unavailable to plants. The regular addition of compost balances the
soil, helping to bring it to the crop-favoring pH range of between 6.5
and 7.5.

Heat absorption. Finished compost helps darken most soils, allowing for
better absorption of heat from sunlight-which can actually extend your
spring and fall growing seasons.

Turn, turn, turn: The more air it gets, the quicker it cooks. Drainage,
water retention, and aeration. Imagine the life of a root, ever
tunneling in search or water and food. In clayish soil, roots have
trouble making headway, so they become shallow and can't reach the food
and water reserves deeper down. Their oxygen supply is also easily cut
off in the tightly packed soil.

Sandy soil causes a different problem; it's like a long stretch of good
road with no place to get food and water. Nutrients and moisture simply
percolate down out of reach.

So we want it all-good drainage, good water retention (even though the
two sound almost contradictory), and openness to incorporate air. Again,
humus is the cure-all. It opens up packed soils and binds together loose
ones. Acting like a sponge, humus helps hold moisture, food, and air so
plants can have access to all of them at will.

Nutrient retention. Chemical fertilizers provide quick-fix doses of
three major nutrients: nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K).
Since such garden additives are highly water-soluble, plants can take
them up quickly-but they can also be easily washed away by rain or
irrigation. In fact, it's estimated that from 25 to 85% of the chemical
nitrogen applied to soil and 15 to 20% of the phosphorus and potassium
are lost to leaching.

Humus holds those water-soluble nutrients inside itself, keeping them
safe from run-off and releasing them slowly to plants. (Even better, the
soil microorganisms in humus release nutrients more slowly during cool
weather-when crops are growing most slowly-and more quickly during warm
weather-when plants are growing most actively.)

Free-choice feeding. The way in which roots and humus directly interact
is probably the most fascinating argument that I know of for the use of
compost. It's a miraculous process whereby plants choose their own diet.

You may have seen the words cation exchange on a soil test. Cations are
positively charged molecules of different minerals like ammonium, iron,
potassium, magnesium, and calcium. Since opposites attract, the
negatively charged molecules of humus (and, to a lesser extent, clay as
well) attract and hold the positive cations.

When a searching root comes along, surrounded by positive hydrogen ions,
it strikes up a friendly exchange with the humus (or clay) molecules:
The root trades its hydrogen ions for the nutrient ions of its choice.
Thus humus allows plants to choose what nutrients they need.

And more. Compost also helps control nematodes and soil diseases,
attracts soil building earthworms, helps plants produce their own growth
stimulators, helps fix heavy metals and other toxins in the soil
(instead of letting them be absorbed by the crops), adds trace minerals
to the soil, and makes plants hardier and more resistant to insects and
diseases. It can even be used as a healing poultice on tree wounds!

Finally, compost can be made virtually without cost at home, by
mimicking the earth's recycling system. Chemical fertilizers, on the
other hand, cost money and use nonrenewable fossil fuels (both as
ingredients and in transporting and manufacturing).

Composting speeds up the earth's soil-building processes, to give
results in months, instead of centuries.

Step #1: Choosing a site

Well, are you convinced? I hope so, because composting really is the
backbone of good horticulture.

If you are ready to start your own pile of black soil magic, the first
concern is location-where you'll build your compost pile. Consider these
suggestions:

1\. Try to locate your pile near your garden-a wheelbarrow loaded with
compost is heavy.

2\. If you're going to be adding some compost-building ingredients by
vehicle, try to build your pile in a spot you can drive to.

3\. Wetting the pile will be a lot easier if it's near a water source.

4\. A good deciduous shade tree near the pile can provide some shelter
from heavy thunderstorms and excessively hot summer sun; it can also let
warmth-boosting fall and winter sunlight through. It'll even provide
leaf material! However, evergreens (which have acidic needles), walnuts
(which exude a toxin through their roots), and eucalyptuses (which have
resinous leaves) are not good choices.

Step #2: Building a bin

You'll need something to put your ingredients in; actually, a
straight-sided pile can be constructed with no bin or supports, and is a
perfectly acceptable way to compost.

But it takes time to shape a freestanding pile; being able to toss the
makings into a container can really speed the process along. In
addition, if your neighbors are close they may voice aesthetic
objections to a freestanding pile of decomposing materials. In that
case, you can compost incognito by using an attractive homemade or
commercial bin. Privacy fencing (plant or wire) might also help shut out
easily offended eyes.

The creative scrounger will find that numerous materials make good
bins-boards, poles, screen, wire, old pallets, concrete blocks, snow
fencing, and hay bales all will serve well. At the other end of the
spectrum are the fancier \$70 to \$200 commercial composters you can buy
through gardensupply catalogs.

Somewhere between total scrounging and total spending are the two
composters we designed at [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small}. (See the sidebar
"Any Way You Stack It..." for construction details.) The "quickie"
version is a mobile pen made of hogwire panels. This low-cost model
allows you to make a pile and then easily move the pen when you want to
start a new pile or turn the old one. The "uptown" model is meant to be
more aesthetically acceptable, yet still entirely practical. Although
you could build it with just one bin (the design is basically modular),
you'll do better if you build more than one enclosure so you can turn
compost from one bin to the other. Better still, build a three-bin
version so you can turn two half-decomposed\"side" piles into the middle
bin to finish cooking!

Any pile, freestanding or contained, should be at least 3' X 3' X 3' to
insure sufficient mass for the composting process. I find 4' X 5' X 5'
ones even better. The bottom of the pile should be exposed to the earth,
and the top should be covered with black plastic or a waterproof tarp to
protect it from rain and drying sun. Contained piles should also have
enough open spaces on the sides for good air circulation.

Step #3: What goes in

So many types of organic matter can be composted that it's easier to
list what shouldn't be put in a compost pile. Here's a partial list of
what not to use:

Cat feces. While almost every other kind of animal manure makes an
excellent compost ingredient. cat feces can contain a parasite
(Toxoplasma gondii) or roundworm (Toxocara cati). Either of these
organisms can spread serious disease to pregnant women, unborn babies,
and children.

Grease and fat. OK in small amounts, but too much will clog up the
composting process.

Coal, coal ashes, and barbecue briquettes. These have overly high
amounts of iron and sulfur (and who knows what else in the briquettes).

Diseased plant matter. Actually, you can place diseased plants in the
center of a compost pile that will be prepared in the hot method-where
temperatures reach a pathogen-killing 140°F. Otherwise, burn them before
composting. Polyester, plastics, and other synthetics. They just don't
rot.

Urban floor sweepings. In high-traffic areas, these can contain as much
as 500 parts per million of lead.

Food preserved with BHT. Research has shown that even very small amounts
of this antioxidant can alter plant growth profoundly.

Overly bulky or hard material. Cornstalks, sunflower stalks, nutshells,
sticks thicker than a pencil, large bones, and oyster and clam shells
should be shredded or pulverized before composting. If you can't do
that, put them in a long-range pile of their own.

Sludge. Commercially reprocessed is an increasingly popular soil
amendment and is almost certainly pathogen-free, but I'm concerned about
the heavy metals and insecticides it may contain.

And what are good compost makings? Well, for starters, how about these:

Plant residues (preferably nonsprayed), such as kitchen and garden
wastes, weeds, grass clippings, leaves (go light on those from
eucalyptuses, walnuts, and evergreens), straw, hay, hedge clippings,
seaweed, aquatic plants, and green manure crops.

Commercial wastes, such as buckwheat hulls, rice hulls, molasses-making
residue, spent hops, fruit processing wastes, commercial fishing scraps,
lake dredgings, sawdust, feathers, wood ashes (in moderation),
utility-company tree trimmings, and vegetable or dairy wastes from
grocery stores.

Home wastes, like eggshells, hair, wool scraps, etc.

Manures from horses, fowl, cows, pigs, sheep, etc. These are even better
if they're mixed with straw (i.e., used stall bedding).

Earthy Compost Books

*The Rodale Guide to Composting by* Jerry Minnich, Marjorie Hunt, and
the editors of *Organic Gardening Magazine;* \$17.95 postpaid from
Rodale Press, 33 E. Minor St., Emmaus, PA 18098. (An updated edition
will to published in January 1992.) PA residents add sales tax. *Let It
Rot* (Updated and Revised Edition), by Stu Campbell, \$8.95 plus \$2.75
shipping from Storey Communications, Inc. Schoolhouse Rd., PO. Box 445,
Pownal, VT 05261. Or call 8001827-8673. VT residents add sales tax.

Step #4: Recipe for success

Once you've assembled lots of appropriate organic matter from the
"compost pile shopping list" above, you're just about ready to start
cooking. The funny thing is, though, there is no one way to make
compost-indeed, there are almost as many methods as there are experts to
advocate them.

It's like baking bread: There are thousands of different recipes, but
all of them have in common some basic practices and vital main
ingredients. Se before you build that long-awaited heap, let's quickly
review the six essentials of successful composting:

Nitrogen: For a compost to cook properly and to have maximum value for
plants, it needs nitrogen, the element that promotes leaf growth. Good
sources of N are pig, chicken, sheep, horse, and cow manure (ranked in
descending amounts of nitrogen); fresh green plant wastes; and blood,
bone, cottonseed, hoof, horn, and alfalfa meals (readily available from
garden-supply centers, but somewhat costly).

Carbon. The vast bulk of any compost pile should be carbonaceous
material: dried leaves, hay, straw, partially dried garden gleanings,
shredded stalks-almost any dried organic matter. This is the key humus
building material and the substance that binds nitrogen (an otherwise
ephemeral element) into the compost.

Air. Although organic matter can decay anaerobically (without oxygen),
it will do so more quickly, will retain more nutrient value, and-for
that matter-cook with much less stink if it composts aerobically (with
oxygen). To provide good airflow to a pile, you should, if possible,
place thick, hollow material like cornstalks and sunflower stalks at the
bottom of a pile. Also, be sure that any compost bins or pens have
perforated sides.

Once the pile is built, you can try poking holes in numerous places with
poles or branches to increase aeration-although I've never noticed that
this technique made much difference. You can try using a "compost
aerator," a pole with a flap like a toggle bolt that opens up when you
pull it up out of your pile (available from garden-supply companies).
I've never used one myself. Or you can just break down and use the
age-old method of adding oxygen to a pile by turning it. Periodically,
take a garden fork and turn the pile-upside down and inside out-on an
adjacent spot.

Water. A compost pile needs moisture to cure. However, too much water
will drown out the air and stop the process. The ideal heap, then, is
damp but not soggy.

Mass. As pointed out earlier, a compost pile needs to have at least a
cubic yard of bulk to heat up properly. And the bigger the better-up to
a point. A pile can hardly be too long or wide, but one that is too tall
(say over five feet high) may mash down and squeeze out air.

Beneficial microorganisms. These are the guys who actually do all the
work. You can buy beneficial bacteria packets to inoculate your compost,
but these little fellows are pretty much everywhere and will thrive if
you give them an environment they like. One simple way to inoculate your
piles for free is to occasionally sprinkle some good garden soil-or
compost from a previous pile-on the one you're constructing.

Step #5: Layering

Now that you know the six essential ingredients of a good compost pile,
you need to know how to combine them. The basic technique is simply to
alternate layers of nitrogenous and carbonaceous materials. If your pile
is all carbon or all nitrogen, your bacteria's diet will be too far out
of whack for them to do their job.

The ideal carbon-to-nitrogen ratio is about 25 to 1, but you'd need all
sorts of time and charts to figure out how to achieve that precise ratio
out of the materials you may have on hand. It's easier-and perfectly
effective-to just take some ingredients from the carbon list and some
from the nitrogen list and layer them, experimenting with proportions
until you find what works for you.

In a nutshell, then: 1) Lay down some stalky material, preferably on
bare soil you have forked up some to allow easier passage for bacteria
and earthworms. 2) Fork on a layer of carbonaceous material. 3) Fork on
a layer of nitrogenous matter. Each layer-N or C-should be about 2" to
8" thick. And fluff it up as you add it to promote airflow. 4) Repeat
steps 2 and 3 until you've finished building your pile. Sprinkle on a
spadeful or two of soil or cured compost occasionally, and if your
materials seem dry, spray on some water periodically as you work. 5)
Cover the pile with a waterproof tarp to protect it.

I mentioned that you'll have to experiment to find the best ratio of
materials. One of my "old reliable" combinations, if you'd like to try
it, is alternating in a 5-5-2 pattern: a 5" layer of green matter, a 5"
layer of dry matter, and a 2" layer of manure. But-contrary to some
opinions-good compost piles can be made with all vegetative matter and
no manure. Just make sure you have enough nitrogen (here's where
something like blood meal or human urine is invaluable).

Step #6: Check your progress

If all goes well, in about four or five days the interior of your
compost pile should have heated up. Indeed, before long a hand poked
inside the heap will get uncomfortably hot.

If that happens, congratulations! Your compost is cooking! If your pile
doesn't heat up, something's wrong. First check to see if the pile is
too wet or too dry. If it's too soggy, turn it, adding more dry material
as you do. If it's too dry, wet it.

Assuming the pile is properly moistened and isn't too compressed for
good air circulation, your problem is that the compost mixture needs
more nitrogen. So turn the pile, adding more carbonaceous matter.

Step #7: Turning compost

There's one last step to making compost: turning the pile. Here you have
some choices. If you want to get your compost quickly, you'll turn the
pile every time it's most intense heat (104° to 170°F) starts to
drop-about every three to five days. That will add more oxygen and kick
up the process. Keep that up and you should have finished compost in two
months or less. If all the ingredients have been finely shredded, thinly
layered, and turned every three days, it's even possible to make usable
compost in two weeks!

If you want your compost in a medium amount of time, turn the pile
approximately six weeks after you make it and again six weeks later.
Your humus should be ready four to six months after you started it.

And if you're long on patience and short on turning time, just leave the
mound alone. Such a slow pile should be ready to use after a year (or
even a little longer).

Time is not the only consideration here-there are raging debates about
whether "quick" or "slow" compost is better. Since quick-cured piles get
well above the pathogen-killing temperature of 140°F, they're the way to
go if you want to compost diseased materials (or kill weed seeds).

On the other hand, slow-pile advocates claim that cold-cured compost
(which cooks at around 100°F) retains more nutrients.

So relax, dig in, and don't be afraid to experiment. Whichever way you
decide to compost, you'll be making the best soil builder your garden
could have. You'll also be participating in the light cycle that
connects all life on this planet-plant, animal, and even human. As
Leandre Poisson has pointed out, we ourselves are "light's ultimate
art."

### ANY WAY YOU STACK IT... {.level3}

THE GREAT THING ABOUT ORGANIC decomposition that it's always ready to
start without you. However, if you want to be assured of consistently
composted material on a regular basis, you'll need to take the matter
into your own hands and provide a setting in which the breakdown process
can occur under the best conditions and with your supervision.

Fortunately, compost doesn't ask much in the way of accommodations, so
depending on how much you're willing to spend, your bin can be as
unassuming as a simple wire enclosure or as fancy as the covered
"post-and-beam" model.

If you're short on time and not ready to spend much money on a
composter, the "quickie" versions are right up your alley. It'll take
about \$40 and less than two hours to put together, and it's made of a
16'-long, 1/4"-wire stock panel hacksawed into 48" X 52" sections and
clipped together at the corners with quick-connecting chain links. To
ease the chore of filling it up, one of the wire sections can be cut in
two, halfway up its 4' height, and similarly linked at the horizontal
split to make a hinged flap that you can secure at the top with a couple
of snap hooks.

Since the panel's wire openings are 2" X 8" at the bottom and increase
to 6" X 8" toward the top, it's necessary to line the walls with cage
fencing (or some other product with openings no larger than 2" X 4").
This inner grid can be secured to the outer with baling wire or leftover
strands from the trimmed-down panels. To put the lid on the kettle, just
invest a couple of bucks in a 5' X 7' polyethylene tarp and some S hooks
or rope to keep the heavy rain off your working pile. Then when it comes
time to start a new heap, simply open one corner of the enclosure,
remove it, and set it up at a different location.

The "uptown" model shown in the illustration costs considerably
more-perhaps as much as \$200, depending on where you get your
materials-and is nothing less than a weekend project. In return for this
investment, though, you'll get a sturdy and attractive compost crib
that's been specifically designed for ease of use.

Our version has two bins, although it could be built as a single or a
triple, depending on your compost rotation schedule. Its front doors
hinge both down and outward, the ventilated partition between the bins
can be lowered in stages, and the front center-posts fold down against
the ground. Fully opened, with the framed covers flipped back on their
supports, each stall is surprisingly accessible for routine turning.

The illustration indicates the number and placement of hinges,
fasteners, hooks, and other hardware. The front 4 X 4 posts should be
sunk 2' into the ground if possible, leaving 5' exposed at the front and
4' at the rear. All posts are centered about 54" apart. The wall panels
are 2 X 4s notched at the ends to make bolted together half-lap joints;
they're secured to the posts with 40d spikes driven into the wood and
bent to form slip-out hook-and-eye fasteners. Cut sections of dog-pen
wire are stapled to the frames.

The tarp covers are framed in 2 X 2s, which are half lap-jointed like
the wall panels. Each lid has two support ribs that are lapped and
bolted in place. Wooden struts fastened to the cover frames hold them up
or support them when they're flipped back, but normally they're just
tied to looped spikes fastened to the centerposts.

If you take the time to build either version now, you should have a
ready supply of valuable organic material available by next spring.

::: divimage
[![art](images/77422-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix015.html#a77422-0)

Turn, turn, turn: The more air it gets, the quicker it cooks.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/77422-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix015.html#a77422-1)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter018.html}

::: body
# [Growing Conifer Trees From Seed](#toc.html#chap-18) {.chapter-title}

**Tricks to planting evergreens, including how to grow conifer seeds
before planting.**

**By Richard Schmidt**

**August/September 1991**

By Richard Schmidt

Whether you plant a single tree or a mighty forest, you'll find pleasure
and satisfaction in..

WE'VE ALL HEARD THE OLD SAW "MIGHTY oaks from tiny acorns grow." Well,
those sighing, whispering conifer forests that still cover much of North
America sprang from humble beginnings, too-the beautiful and useful
trees, however, have a hard time getting started on their own.

That doesn't mean that evergreens are necessarily difficult to grow.
With a little patience and a dollop of knowledge, there's no reason why
you can't have the pleasure and satisfaction of raising your own trees
from seed.

The trick to growing conifers (a group including pine, spruce, fir, and
other narrow-leaved evergreens) lies in understanding how best to work
in harmony with nature to first sprout the seeds and then to protect the
delicate young plants from disease. As you likely know, conifer seeds
(some of which are as large as a quarter inch in diameter, while others
are minute) are tucked between the scales of cones. The best time to
gather them is in the fall, when the fibrous "petals" at the base of the
woody husks have begun to open, indicating ripeness. Simply pick or clip
off some cones and place them in a dish. As they dry, the seeds should
loosen and drop out, though occasionally a stubborn piece of "fruit"
will have to be dismantled in order to get at the nuggets within.

### HOW TO GROW GROWING SEEDS BEFORE PLANTING {.level3}

**ABORVITAE:** Stratify for 2 months at 40°\
**CEDAR:** No treatment is needed, but soaking in water for severals
hours speeds germination.\
**CHAMAECYPARIS:** Dry at 90°- 110°F after fall collection. Stratify at
40°F for 2-3 months.\
**FIRS** Use fresh seeds (they lose vitality after one year). Stratify
for 1-3 months at 40° F for 2-3 months.\
**HEMLOCK:** Stratify for 2.4 months at 40°F;\
**PAWN (CHINESE) RED.\
WOOD:** No treatment needed.\
**PINE:** No treatment is needed for fresh seeds from bristlecone, jack,
Canary Island, shore, lodgepole, pina, Aleppo, Jeffrey, Swiss mountain,
Austrian black, longleaf, chir, Scotch; Japanese black, Himalayan white,
maritime, ponderosa, table-mountain, Monterey, red, and Norway. For old
seed and other species, stratify 1-3 months at 40°F\
**SEQUOIA:** Stratify giant and\
California Coast redwood for 2\
months at 40°F\
**SPRUCE:** No treatment is\
needed for Norway, Engelman,\
and dwarf Alberta. For other\
types, stratify 1-3 months.

At this point, your chances of success will be much improved if you take
the time to understand how Mother Nature goes about reproducing
conifers. The seeds of evergreens don't sprout as readily as, say,
garden-variety marigolds. Nature, you see, must protect her future
forests from such catastrophes as fire, drought, and disease-and does so
by means of stratagems that prevent an entire crop of seeds from coming
up (and thus being vulnerable) all at one time. Some of the cone-borne
kernels begin to grow immediately, white others may lie dormant for a
very long time.

Therefore, if you were to simply stick wild conifer seeds in the ground,
it might be years before any of them began to grow. Some wouldn't sprout
until bacteria and fungi had eaten away at their coatings. Others would
burgeon only after exposure to fire, to repeated freezing or thawing, or
in response to some other natural sequence of events. The key to
success, then, is speedy germination that in some way replicates the
processes found in the wild.

One easy way to achieve germination is by exposing the kernels-for
periods of time that can vary from one species to another-to cold
temperatures. This treatment, called "stratification," serves to break
the dormancy of the embryos.

In nature, stratification occurs outdoors over the course of the winter,
but it can also be brought about artificially in a refrigerator. The
process is quite simple. Just soak the kernels in water for 12 to 24
hours, drain them, then layer them with slightly damp peat moss or
vermiculite in ajar or plastic tub, and then refrigerate the containers
for one to four months (they'll need a temperature that's below 45°F but
above freezing). Some conifer seeds don't require stratification if
planted fresh. However, older seeds will always benefit from exposure to
a cold period, either natural or artificial.

While you can simply plant your stratified seeds in the ground outdoors,
as happens in the wild, the low success rate which generally rewards
that method provides a good argument for coddling your plants. To do so,
you'll need wooden flats-measuring about 18 inches square and 2 to 3
inches deep-and a special bedding medium. Moist milled sphagnum moss-or
equal parts of damp peat moss and vermiculite, or peat moss and perlite
(all of which are available from most nurseries)-will serve the purpose.
Because they're soil-free, these planting media are free of the fungi
that cause "damping off'-a sudden fatal collapse of seedlings that's
caused by an earthborne disease.

The seeds should be shallowly sown an inch or two apart, forming a grid
pattern in the flats. The bed should be kept moist but not wet. (As an
alternative, plant each of your trees-to-be in a small pot, or in a
plastic foam cup with a hole in the bottom.)

After a few weeks-if you've been careful and just a little lucky-tender
green needles will begin to push above the surface. Allow the shoots to
straighten and begin sending out new needles, then start them on a diet
of half-strength liquid organic food (try diluted fish emulsion). The
new plants should be nurtured carefully and kept in a sunny, protected
spot-in a greenhouse, beneath a tree, or under a fabric shade structure
(which might be no more than an old piece of bed sheet stretched on a
wooden frame and suspended two feet above the flats).

When the seedlings begin to crowd one another in their containers, it's
time to transplant them, either to a temporary nursery bed or to large
pots. (I use one-gallon metal cans, discarded by a local school
cafeteria. Simply clean and punch four drainage holes in the bottom of
each.) Because it's important not to disturb the plants' roots any more
than necessary, I suggest carefully cutting the growing medium between
the seedlings with a spatula or putty knife before lifting out the
individual treelets. When you replant them, set the little evergreens in
the earth to the same depth at which they were previously growing.

I've found that a mixture of equal parts soil, garden compost, and
coarse organic matter-such as ground bark or chunky peat moss-makes a
good potting combination.

On the other hand, if the seedlings are planted in a nursery bed,
instead of individual containers, you should work the earth well and add
plenty of compost or peat moss, then plant the conifers about a foot
apart, taking care to protect them from bright sun until they're well
established. (In areas where winters are severe, your baby trees should
be transplanted directly to a cold frame if separate posts aren't used.)

The best way to insure a crop of healthy evergreens is to keep your
seedlings growing rapidly. To do so, you'll have to give them sufficient
(but not excessive) water, and monthly feedings of half-strength liquid
organic fertilizer-stronger solutions of plant food may damage the
roots.

Though individual species do grow at differing rates, a young conifer
will generally be ready for its permanent growing spot two years after
its seed was sown. Once again, it's important not to disturb the root
ball when transplanting. Remove plants from a nursery bed and trench all
around each small tree, burrowing underneath before attempting to lift
it from the surrounding soil.

If your evergreen has been maturing in an individual pot, just cut the
container's sides with a pair of shears before removing the sapling.
Finally, be sure to allow the young tree ample room to grow, and give it
plenty of tender loving care for at least a year after transplanting.

Growing conifers from seed isn't for the impatient. But if you have the
interest, the time, and a willingness to let nature work its magic (with
just a little assistance along the way), you can reap the rewards of
nurturing a tree which-as the wind whispers through its needles-will
scent your days and soothe your nights.

::: divimage
[![art](images/77424-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix016.html#a77424-0)
:::
:::

[]{#part002.html}

::: body
![art](images/1991-10-01.jpg)
:::

[]{#chapter019.html}

::: body
# [Mushroom Foraging In The Fall](#toc.html#chap-19) {.chapter-title}

**Understanding the dos and don'ts of fall mushroom foraging is key to
enjoying the rewards of harvesting them.**

**By Les Davenport**

**October/November 1991**

Autumn is a time of change in the woodlands. The vivid green hues of
summer fade into the auburn shades of fall as plant life in the great
outdoors prepares for a long winter's sleep.

During this period of transition, many who enjoy harvesting Mother
Nature's abundant vintages miss one of nature's finest bounties - the
fall mushrooms. Learn to distinguish a few choice edible fungus, and
hours of mushroom foraging enjoyment can be added to your autumnal
calendar.

Understanding the dos and don'ts of fall mushroom foraging is key to
enjoying the rewards of harvesting the mushrooms. As in all outdoor
ventures, a novice should start slowly and gain confidence before taking
on the role of a veteran.

The first and foremost rule when mushroom foraging is to get to know
just a few species - and get to know them well. To achieve this,
purchase a field guide to North American mushrooms. Most bookstores
stock one or can quickly order it. Though local libraries typically
stock several, buying your own copy is a wise investment. Pocket-size
editions with color photos are easily carried and help assure positive
identification. Never be without it in the fall woods.

A quality guide should contain the following species subheadings:
description, edibility, season, habitat, range and look-alikes. Each
category lists attributes that help even the veteran mushroom hunter to
learn more about North American fungi.

### Personal Favorites {.level3}

Fall mushrooms have many different flavors and textures. The majority of
edible varieties have nicknames that mimic their characteristics, much
like the spring morel, which is dubbed the "sponge" mushroom. Its colors
can blend with the drab shades of dead bark or stand out like the colors
of Christmas. Harvesting mushrooms for the dinner table while hiking the
woodlands enhances the appreciation of forest ecology. Here are some of
my personal favorites.

### Pear-Shaped and Giant Puffball (Puffball Family) {.level3}

Puffball mushrooms are among the most recognizable of fall fungi. They
are round in appearance and range in size from the pear-shaped puffball
(*Lycoperdon pyriforme*), of approximately one inch, to the giant
puffball (*Calvatia gigantea*), which may reach diameters larger than a
basketball. Most are rated "choice" for eating. The few that are not
won't affect your health and can easily be distinguished by their rank
odor. The fruiting body of a puffball grows directly from its root
system. If you find one with a stalk or stem, discard it; it's not a
puffball and may very well be an unsuitable look-alike, again
characterized by a rank odor.

Members of the puffball family grow from July through November in most
North American softwood and hardwood forests. Their outer coloration is
typically white to olive brown, and should always be white inside for
use at the dinner table. As puffballs age, their centers turn
yellowish-brown and eventually dry, producing spores (microscopic
seeds). A single giant puffball produces up to 7 trillion spores. To
understand how the puffball got its name, step on the dried shell after
a puffball is spent, and watch it "puff" smoke - in the form of millions
of dried spores.

Pear-shaped puffballs grow in scattered-to-dense clusters on decaying
logs and debris. The giants grow in open timber, pastured ground and
even some urban areas. During prime conditions, giant puffballs decorate
the forest like a woodland volleyball court.

To prepare a giant puffball, cut or peel the outer shell. For a
pear-shaped puffball, just wash the outer core. Do not wash or soak the
meat unless insects have laid first claim. The sweet smell and savory
flavor of the puffball makes an excellent addition to a saute of onions,
bell peppers and other favorite garden vegetables. The most popular
method of preparation, however, is frying. Fry the pear-shaped puffball
whole, but slice its big brother thin like a fish fillet. Coat with a
chicken or fish batter before frying. Use your fresh puffballs promptly,
though, as they can't be feasibly canned, frozen or dried for long-term
storage.

### Hen of the Woods (Polypore Family) {.level3}

Catch a glimpse of this fungi in the fall and you may easily mistake it
for a hen pheasant or prairie chicken pruning its plumage.

The hen of the woods (*Grifola frondosa*) has a grayish brown cap
growing from a white stalk, which branches from a compound base.

This handsome mushroom appears in wet Septembers through mild, moist
Novembers. It can be found from Canada to Louisiana, throughout the
Midwest and in coastal woodlands. Hunt for the hen near deciduous trees
and stumps. They're also known to grow around some coniferous trees.
Hens often appear in the same location year after year. They blend well
with fallen leaves, but their size gives them away. A single mushroom of
this variety can reach 20 inches in diameter and weigh 100 pounds. Hunt
them with a big bag, or take along a friend with a strong back.

The firm texture of the hen lends itself to a variety of cooking
techniques. Slice it thin and roast it, cut into steaks or coat in a
batter and fry. You can't ruin it. Diced bits used in stir-fry recipes
give chicken and bean sprouts a taste that captures the attention of
even picky eaters. Unlike puffballs, minimal flavor is lost by canning
or freezing.

### Chicken Mushroom (Polypore Family) {.level3}

In autumn, chicken mushrooms (*Laetiporus sulphureus*) decorate the
stumps, trunks and logs of deciduous and coniferous trees in blazing
orange-red or orange-yellow colors. Pay careful attention here, as the
chicken mushroom bears a close resemblance to many nonedible types.

Also be careful not to succumb to the addictive smell. It's tempting to
eat them raw - but don't. Uncooked, this variety causes indigestion.
Trust me on this one.

Among veteran hunters, the chicken is one of the most prized mushrooms.
The reasons are simple: It's anything but plentiful, and when fried, a
tasty chicken dinner is the finder's reward. Mushroom hunters can search
for these great-eating members of the polypore family from May through
November. Although scarce, their range extends from Canada to Florida
and into some coastal regions. If the humidity is right and daytime
temperatures are moderate, the chicken may be nestled somewhere in your
favorite fall haunt.

### Fried-Chicken Mushroom (Tricholoma Family) {.level3}

While similar in name to the chicken mushroom, the fried-chicken
mushroom (*Lyophyllum decastes*) is very different. Its cap is gray- to
yellow-brown with white gills and a stalk. Growths are typically found
in dense clusters on the ground near decaying deciduous trees or in
grassy areas throughout most of North America. Their numbers dominate
June through October - and even later if the weather is mild.

Edibility is rated "good, with caution." The "with caution" part is
meant to give respect to the poisonous sulfur tuft, a close look-alike.
Novice hunters can't tell these two apart until they smell the tuft's
flat odor or partake of its bitter tang. Digesting the tuft invokes mild
to severe gastric distress, and in rare cases has caused death. The odds
of death from mushroom poisoning are about as likely as being hit by
lightning - but odds mean little if you're the unlucky soul.

Quite a few people are quick to disagree with the fried chicken's "good"
rating. This author concurs that its flavor might better be described as
"delicious." After a thorough washing, tear these mushrooms along the
gill lines into bite-size strips. Fry them like chicken or saute them
for a spaghetti dish. They are also wonderful in casseroles.

### Oyster Mushroom (Tricholoma Family) {.level3}

Don't head for the woods just yet, seafood mavens. "Oyster" (*Pleurotus
ostreatus*) refers to the mushroom's shape, not taste. The cap of the
Oyster can be white, gray or brown. The gills are whitish or
yellow-tinged and are usually attached to the wood of deciduous trees.
Occasionally the oyster grows from a stublike stalk. It is widely
dispersed throughout North America. Dry river and creek bottoms with
willow or other softwood trees are prime places to search for the oyster
fungi.

This mushroom is prolific in the fall, but under favorable conditions
can appear year-round. The hearty oysters that grow in mild winter
weather and freeze before aging can even be chopped free from dead wood
and thawed.

The oyster's pleasant smell distinguishes it from nonedible look-alikes
that either lack odor or smell like tree bark. Check aging oysters for
white grubs; then wash and tear into smaller strips. Roll the damp
pieces in a dry mixture of pancake batter and seasoning salt and fry in
peanut oil.

### Honey Mushroom (Tricholoma Family) {.level3}

The honey mushroom (*Armillariella mellea*), also nicknamed "button
mushroom," has a one- to four-inch yellow-brown cap and stalk with a
whitish ring directly under the cap. It's similar in shape and taste to
many commercially raised mushrooms.

Like the spring morel, it's hunted by many who believe dangerous
look-alikes don't exist. Unfortunately, the honey mushroom has more
fearsome twins than Minnesota has - the *Omphalotus olearius*,
*Gymnopilus spectabilis* and *Galerina autmnalis* are just a few. All
have either a rank odor, nonwhite gill colors or other recognizable
features pinpointed in field guides.

Honey mushrooms appear in hardwood forests August through November:
Logged-out timbers are the best places to find these delectable fungi by
the bushel basket.

Honey mushrooms are exceptional when prepared using morel recipes. Their
distinctive taste comes through best when deep-fried in egg-and-cracker
batter or sauteed in butter.

The chemistry of change in the autumn woodland is a sight to behold. And
the fungi families are very much a part of this magic. While venturing
through the forests this fall, challenge your woodsmanship by harvesting
edible mushrooms. Your food budget won't mind the reprieve.

### Safety First {.level3}

Mushroom foraging is as safe as you make it. Follow this list of
precautions and your mushrooming days will be memorable events:

1.  If on-the-spot identification of a harvested mushroom is not
    possible, separate it from the rest of your find. After the hunt,
    enlist the services of a resident expert or field guide to verify
    the edibility of the suspect fungi.
2.  Do not consume wild mushrooms raw. They are indigestible when
    uncooked.
3.  Soak and rinse your mushrooms thoroughly to remove any residue that
    may have drifted from agricultural spraying.
4.  It's always best to have a veteran mushroomer inspect the find of a
    novice hunter before allowing preparation.
5.  If health problems follow the consumption of mushrooms, contact a
    doctor immediately. Don't wait until complications set in.
6.  When hunting alone, tell someone when you're going out and when you
    plan to return.
7.  Those susceptible to poison ivy, oak, or sumac should pay special
    attention to its presence and, if applicable, use preventive
    medication.
8.  Wear long pants, a long-sleeved shirt, and a hat to prevent
    scratched legs and discourage ticks.
9.  Don't push your luck by walking through heavily wooded terrain after
    dark.

### Preserving Your Bounty {.level3}

Fortunate hunters who find more mushrooms than can be eaten fresh or
given away have three options for preserving the excess. Each has pros
and cons. You be the judge.

To freeze mushrooms, cut them into bite-size chunks and soak in water
for a minimum of one hour. This will remove any insects from the meat.
Rinse thoroughly and place the mushrooms in a Ziplock freezer bag, seal
tightly and freeze. Though this is the most common practice for
long-term storage, it causes appreciable loss of flavor and texture.

Drying mushrooms (which is not possible with all varieties) first
entails cutting them into large chunks and thoroughly rinsing them. Then
sew the pieces together with string and allow to dry in an attic or
other warm, dry area. Soaking the dried pieces in water will bring them
back to a state of use. The texture is not as rigid as when fresh, but
most of the flavor is restored.

The third - and least used - preservation is canning. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture suggests this method in their Home and
Gardening Bulletin.

To can mushrooms: Trim stems and the discolored parts of the mushrooms.
Soak mushrooms in cold water for 10 minutes to remove adhering soil.
Wash in clean water. Leave small mushrooms whole; cut larger ones in
halves or quarters. Steam four minutes or beat gently for 15 minutes in
a covered saucepan without added liquid.

Pack hot mushrooms in glass jars, to within a half inch of the top. Add
¼ teaspoon salt to half-pints; ½ teaspoon to pints. For better color,
add crystalline ascorbic acid: 1/16 teaspoon to half-pints; 1/8 teaspoon
to pints. Add boiling-hot cooking liquid or boiling water to cover
mushrooms, leaving a ½-inch space at the top of the jar. Adjust jar
lids. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds of pressure (240°F) for 30
minutes.

Before use, check the seals to ensure a vacuum - and protection from
bacterial growth. Canning makes a midwinter meal of mushrooms worth the
added effort.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-0)

PHOTO: LES DAVENPORT

Gary Davenport, nephew of the author, holds a giants puffball (Calvatia
gigantea), which sometimes grows to diamaters larger than a basketball
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-1)

LES DAVENPORT

Pear-shaped puffballs (*Lycoperdon pyriforme*) are approximately 1 inch
in diameter and grow in clusters on decaying wood.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-2)

LES DAVENPORT

The fried-chicken mushroom (*Lyophyllum decastes*): Enjoy harvesting it,
but beware of look-alikes.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-3)

LES DAVENPORT

The hen of the woods (*Grifola frondosa*) often grows In the some
location year after year.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-4)

LES DAVENPORT

The chicken mushroom (*Laetiporus sulphurous*) is one of the most prized
among veteran mushroomers.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-5)

LES DAVENPORT

The oyster mushroom (*Pleurotus ostreatus*) is "choice" for eating. It
grows from deciduous trees.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-6.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-6)

LES DAVENPORT

These aging honey mushrooms (*Armillariella mellea*) are great late-year
replacements for the early-spring morel.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-7.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-7)

LES DAVENPORT

Believe It or not, even this jelly leaf fungus (*Tremella foliacea*) is
edible.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-8.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-8)

LES DAVENPORT

Some coral fungus family members are edible; others cause gastric upset.
Consult a field guide before you forage.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-9.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-9)

The turkey-tail mushroom (*Trametes versicolor*) is also a member of the
polypore family. Mind you, it's nonedible.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71382-10.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix017.html#a71382-10)

Some oyster mushrooms grow from a stublike stalk when coming up out of
old, decaying wood.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter020.html}

::: body
# [Woodstove Warning, Food Consumption, Green Investments And More Bits And Pieces](#toc.html#chap-20) {.chapter-title}

**News from the field: Growing green industries, the boom in bottled
water and the state of your state.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**October/November 1991**

## [Woodstove Warning and Safety]{.Arial} {.level2}

As winter approaches, many of us depend on woodstoves and fireplaces to
heat our homes. While these heating systems can provide warmth as well
as atmosphere, they may also be responsible for producing something less
appealing - indoor and outdoor air pollution.

According to the American Lung Association, smoke from these heaters
contains carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and other organic compounds that
can cause respiratory illness or aggravate existing conditions such as
bronchitis, emphysema and asthma. Improper burning of wood also causes
outdoor air pollution. In fact, the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) reports that woodstoves and fireplaces emit more carbon monoxide
than all U.S. industries combined.

The good news is that recent efforts by the EPA to tighten regulations
on woodstoves and fireplace inserts have helped to make newer versions
cleaner and more energy efficient.

For those of us still battling with age-old heating systems, the EPA
suggests the following precautions to ensure a cleaner and more complete
burning of fuel, as well as a healthier environment:

-   Use only wood that has been split and dried for over six months.
-   Avoid smoldering, low-temperature fires - the greatest polluters.
-   Never overload the firebox. This ensures that air circulates freely.
-   Never burn garbage, trash or treated wood since each can emit
    poisonous fumes.
-   Above all, watch for signals such as smoke escaping from the
    woodstove chimney or lazy flames in the firebox. These are sure
    signs that more air is needed for efficient burning.

## [Battle Between Congress and EPA Regulations]{.Arial} {.level2}

Is Congress allowing the EPA to do its job? Washington University law
professor Richard Lazarus doesn't think so. Lazarus, who has written a
20-year history of the agency, says that although he supports the notion
that Congress should be a watchdog of the federal government, it has in
extreme cases "virtually paralyzed" the EPA. His views are detailed in
an article published in the Journal of Law and Contemporary Problems.

In his article, Lazarus argues that the intense and negative quality of
congressional oversight of the EPA has resulted in the perception that
its officials are incompetent, negligent "and even corrupt. In isolated
instances, such a public image may well have been justified. In many
others, however, it plainly was not."

Lazarus also notes that congressional oversight has slowed the evolution
of federal environmental law and produced poorly designed legislation,
"chilled" decision making and innovation within the EPA, exhausted
limited agency resources and exacerbated Congress's inconsistency on
important environmental matters.

Lazarus, who believes the EPA should be elevated from agency to cabinet
status within the federal government, suggests several reforms that
would help eliminate ineffective congressional oversight and discusses
the political reality of these reforms. For example, he suggests that
Congress should hold oversight committee chairpersons more accountable
for unnecessary hearings by linking their budget requests to the
committee's effectiveness.

## [Food Consumption Patterns]{.Arial} {.level2}

The average American's diet has undergone radical changes since World
War II. Technology advanced food preparation but may also have led us
toward nutritional chaos. The facts below underline the need for
more-responsible eating:

In that 50-year span:

  ----------------------------------- ------
  Pastry consumption increased        70%
  Soft-drink consumption increased    80%
  Potato-chip consumption increased   85%
  Fat consumption increased           100%
  Salt consumption increased          100%
  Sugar consumption increased         100%
  Vegetable consumption increased     40%
  Fruit consumption decreased         45%
  Whole-grain consumption decreased   150%
  ----------------------------------- ------

In addition, during that time we have increased our consumption of
chemically altered foods from 10 to 80 percent of our total diet.

*Source: The Food Bible by Jayne Benkendorf/Rainbow Books Inc.*

## [Bottled Water on the Rise]{.Arial} {.level2}

In 1990, the water-treatment industry continued its growth trend and
reached the highest level of revenue in its history: \$7.6 billion,
according to a report from the Water Quality Association. It projects
\$12.27 billion in revenues in the year 1995. The \$7.6 billion market
represents home drinking-water treatment equipment (9.2 percent),
commercial (11.7 percent), other residential equipment (14.1 percent),
bottled water (28.9 percent) and industrial applications (36.1 percent).

## [Green Investment]{.Arial} {.level2}

Good news for those of us who want the earth to grow as our money does.
Money magazine reports that the total investment in "green" companies
has risen to \$625 billion, up from \$500 billion last year and a mere
\$100 billion in 1985.

That's good news for Wall Street and Mother Earth, but with the growing
number of "environmental" and "socially responsible" mutual funds out
there, a little research reveals that some of the investments are
"greener" than others. For example, the Dreyfus Third Century fund buys
certain defense stocks; the Pax World fund doesn't. When investing, make
sure your money manager's goals match your own: "Green" to him may just
refer to profits from funds that don't follow as strict criteria as you
do.

## [Smart Laser Tape Measure]{.Arial} {.level2}

File this under the "Why-didn't-I-think-of-that" category: an ultrasonic
tape measure. At long last, no more games of tape-measure Twister as you
attempt to hold down that unruly metal strip. Now it's just aim and
shoot. The Ultrasonic Tape Measurer will read up to 40 feet away, with
measurements in your choice of feet or meters. This wonder also adds
several measurements and multiplies them to give you area and volume,
and is accurate to within +/- 0.5 percent.

## [Personal Ad Requiring a Boat]{.Arial} {.level2}

Our senior editor was buying some chops last weekend when she ran across
this notice in the neighborhood butcher shop:

WANTED: GOOD WOMAN WHO ENJOYS COUNTRY MUSIC, LIKES TO COOK, SEW AND
FISH. PLEASE SEND A LETTER AND PHOTO...OF BOAT AND MOTOR.

So all you lonely gals out there with fine culinary skills, steady hands
and an 18-foot Grady-White with a 115-hp Yamaha, drop us a note. We'll
pass it on to the lucky guy.

## [Green Index Findings for Your State]{.Arial} {.level2}

Surprise, surprise: Oregon and Maine have the healthiest environments in
the United States - and Alabama and Louisiana have the worst.

Those findings come from the Green Index, a new study from the
[[Institute for Southern
Studies]{.800080}](http://www.southernstudies.org/), which uses 256
environmental and lifestyle factors to rate the states.

Oregon's Governor Barbara Roberts is hardly surprised that her state
heads the list. "We've led the way on important environmental
legislation," Roberts says, noting that her state was the first to
require recycling and to establish deposits on bottles and cans.

Some other Green Index tidbits:

-   Nevada has the best water quality; Florida the worst.
-   Maryland produces the most garbage per person; Vermont the least.
-   New Yorkers use the least amount of energy per capita; Alaskans the
    most.
-   Alaska is ranked first in quality of life based on natural resources
    and recreation opportunities; Indiana last.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-0)

PHOTO: FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-1)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-2)

 

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-3)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-4)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-5)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71384-6.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix018.html#a71384-6)

FILE ART
:::
:::

[]{#chapter021.html}

::: body
# [Kitchen Notes](#toc.html#chap-21) {.chapter-title}

**Kitchen recipes made simple from persimmon beer to rye bread.**

**Courtesy of the Curtis Publishing Company**

**October/November 1991**

The following kitchen notes are reprinted from a 1915 edition of *The
Country Gentleman,* a farm journal stuffed with practical country-living
tips and home-baked gems. So get out your teacup and start measuring!

**Persimmon Beer.** *Ingredients:* Five pounds of lump sugar, three
gallons of water, a quarter of a teacupful of yeast, a slice of toasted
bread, two lemons and eight persimmons. Boil the sugar and the water for
an hour. When it is cold, add the persimmons (sliced), the juice and
peels of the lemons and the yeast on the bread.

Let stand for two or three days in a tub covered with a thick cloth.
Then strain and bottle it. It will be ready to drink in five days after
it is bottled.

**Nut Sandwiches.** Nuts may be used very successfully in sandwiches for
the school luncheon. Black or English walnuts, hazelnuts, pecans and
hickory nuts may be used in the following recipes.

These sandwiches may well take the place of cake in the lunch box, as
they supply the required sweets in a wholesome and delicious form.
Well-baked bread, cut into even slices and buttered, should form the
basis of all sandwiches.

### Homemade Fillings {.level3}

**Nut-Prune Filling.** Wash prunes and soak overnight in enough water to
cover. Allow them to simmer on the stove until the fruit is plump.
Sweeten slightly, remove the prunes from the juice, and dry them out in
the oven. Cool, remove the stones, and crush the fruit with chopped nut
meats, using one to two nut meats for each prune.

**Nut-Watermelon-Preserve Filling.** Drain watermelon preserves, chop
and mix with a few chopped nut meats.

**Nut-Cottage-Cheese Filling.** Mix a few chopped nut meats with some
cottage cheese, season with salt and moisten with milk or cream. Add a
little sugar if you want a sweet sandwich filling.

**Recipe for Rye Bread.** Scald half a pint of milk and add half a pint
of water. When the liquid is lukewarm, add half a cake of compressed
yeast that has been dissolved in two tablespoonfuls of cool water and
half a teaspoonful of salt; then stir in sufficient rye flour to make a
batter. Beat thoroughly; cover and stand aside for 3 hours.

Add sufficient rye flour to make a dough stiff enough to knead. Knead
thoroughly; then pound it for 5 minutes. Shape it at once into loaves,
and put into greased pans. Stand aside for an hour to an hour and a
half, until it is very light; brush with water, and bake in a moderately
quick oven for an hour.

**REPRINTED COURTESY OF THE CURTIS PUBLISHING COMPANY.**
:::

[]{#chapter022.html}

::: body
# [Pet Advice For The Modern Homestead](#toc.html#chap-22) {.chapter-title}

**Calming thunderstruck animals, tattooing dogs and other useful tips.**

**By Emily Miller**

**October/November 1991**

Here's some pet advice to keep your favorite animals healthy and happy.

***When my dog hears loud noises, such as thunder or firecrackers, he
just cowers on the ground and shivers. What can I do to help him put up
with these noises a little better?***

Lots of people get into what is called the "lt's OK" syndrome with their
dogs when the animals are frightened. They see that their pet is scared
or acting aggressively, and they bend down, pet the dog, and whisper,
"It's OK, it's OK," or scoop the dog up in their arms to comfort it.

Petting a dog and speaking to it in a comforting tone is a way of
rewarding it for its behavior. When people see their dog reacting to a
situation with fear or aggression and then stroke it, they are telling
it that this is the right reaction to have. The dog, who is not dumb,
will repeat its reaction to get more praise. The owner then comforts the
animal, who becomes increasingly nervous or aggressive.

It's important to try to let your pet know when it is young that loud
noises are nothing to be afraid of. If it is a controllable situation
(your living room during a storm, for example), try to anticipate the
loud noise and make your puppy sit until the noise is out of earshot.
Praise your pet lavishly after the crashing has passed, and in time it
will lose its fear.

Noises such as firecrackers, which are much more dramatic and disturbing
to animals, are harder to deal with. Because they happen only a few
times a year, on occasions that are easy to anticipate and plan for, be
compassionate and allow your dog (who has much more sensitive hearing
than you do!) to stay at home. If this is impossible, I have known some
people who have even used rubber earplugs to some success.

The ASPCA puts out some great pamphlets on training and behavior, which
they will send to you at minimal cost. One of them is called "It's
Okay!" and deals expressly with this problem. The ASPCA chapter in your
area can help you even more.

***My Rottweiler puppy, Lucy, has been tearing our walls apart to get at
the Sheetrock. My house is a mess and I'm very frustrated. How can I
stop her?***

All dogs are basically wolves in canine clothing. Your little wolf cub
is coming out of its den and tasting different things. She has probably
tasted some trees (in the form of furniture) and animal hide (in the
form of shoes), and she is finding different satisfaction in the things
that she's chewing.

Sheetrock contains gypsum, a compound composed mainly of calcium, and
puppies need lots of calcium as they grow. As dogs grow older, they
become increasingly lactose intolerant (meaning they cannot digest milk
well enough to obtain calcium from it), so proper amounts must be
obtained when they are puppies. Lucy is searching out hidden deposits of
calcium in the mines of your walls, as well as busying herself with
scraping off the paint, drywall, and everything else she can get her
teeth into.

You have two problems to solve. The first is fulfilling Lucy's dietary
needs. The second is keeping her busy while you're out of the house.

Go to your butcher and buy a quantity of shank bones cut in 4" lengths.
Boil the bones in a pot of water with garlic cloves for about 45
minutes. After they cool, scrape off all the meat, gristle, and marrow
until they are clean. Put them in a bag and pop the bag in your freezer.
Whenever you leave the house, give Lucy a fresh frozen bone. When you
return home, put the bone back in the freezer (in this way it can be
recycled several times). The bone will satisfy her need to chew and her
need for calcium, and the cold will feel good on her gums. Garlic tastes
good to dogs as well and is a natural antibiotic and flea repellent.

Make sure to discipline Lucy when you catch her pulling at the walls.
Yell "No!", shake a can with some pennies in it, make her lie down, or
do whatever you do to let her know that her behavior is unacceptable.
And while you are plastering up the walls behind her, remind yourself
that puppyhood does not last forever.

***I live in an apartment, and my cat never goes out. Still, I've been
told that I should get her a rabies shot. Is this absolutely
necessary?***

In some areas of the country (and this includes cities as large as New
York), rabies has reached alarming proportions. Cats have superseded
dogs as the most popular pet in America, and that means cat owners have
a real responsibility in keeping the growth of the disease in check.
Even if the chance is extremely remote that your cat could come into
contact with an animal carrying rabies, the consequences are so drastic
that any protection is worthwhile. It's a relatively inexpensive
vaccination provided by many animal shelters. Don't think twice about
it. Vaccinate.

***I've heard about a registry service that involves tattooing a number
on a dog's abdomen. Will this really help anyone find my dog if it is
lost and could you give me some more information on it?***

Absolutely! The National Dog Registry (NDR) has been registering and
tracking dogs since 1966. Each year, nearly one out of five dogs is
stolen or lost. Collar tags are virtually useless as they can be lost,
or ripped off your dog by thieves. NDR works with veterinarians,
shelters, pounds, laboratories, dog wardens and police across the
country to locate and return dogs to their owners. These pets might
otherwise be put to sleep, used for fur in gloves or coats or for animal
testing or dog fighting.

NDR tattoos the inner thigh of your animal with a series of numbers (the
thigh is tattooed because tissue from the ears can be easily removed).
Spencer is tattooed with my Social Security number. The process is
painless and can be done in shelters or by many vets and groomers. There
is a one-time processing fee to register your number with NDR. Once you
have registered your number, each animal will be automatically tagged
for life.

NDR has a return rate of more than 95%. Its hot-line number is open 24
hours a day, 365 days a year, and its system utilizes a hightech
computer. It is endorsed by many organizations, such as People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) and the American Kennel Club. I
strongly urge you to register your animals. To find out the closest
place you can register, call 800-NDR-DOGS.

***Linus, my kitten, will be turning seven months old next week. I've
been told that neutering is a good idea. But what exactly are the
benefits?***

First and foremost, by altering Linus you won't be adding to the
millions of animals that are put to sleep each year in the United States
because shelters around the country can't find homes for them. As the
bumper sticker says, "Don't Litter - Neuter." But equally important,
there are many health benefits to altering your cat. When altered, males
have less chance of getting kidney stones or bladder problems, and
females run a much reduced risk of getting mammarian, ovarian, and
uterine cancer (they also don't go into heat, which, though it happens
only twice a year, is not much fun).

Alteration is not a cruelty but a kindness. Unless your animal is of so
special a breed that its genetic material is valuable, call your
veterinarian and make an appointment. It's never too late (although it's
best to do it before they become sexually active at six months of age),
and it's really one of the nicest things you can do for your animal.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71388-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix019.html#a71388-0)

HOLLY FARMS

Maggie, of Greene County, NY, satisfying her canine urge for animal
hide.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71388-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix019.html#a71388-1)

PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY NATIONAL DOG REGISTRY

Sparky undergoes a painless tattoing process that will identify him for
life.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter023.html}

::: body
# [How To Make A Fall Wreath](#toc.html#chap-23) {.chapter-title}

**Making natural wreaths is a great way to bring life into your house in
the fall.**

**By Susi Jacobson**

**October/November 1991**

Learning how to make a fall wreath starts with accepting gifts from the
woods.

Between the woods, fields and roadsides all around us, you have all the
supplies you'll need to create unique natural wreaths and gifts. I've
been collecting my supplies naturally for eight years and am continually
finding something new that nature has to offer for my creations. When I
forage for natural material, I either go out looking for a particular
item or just walk, looking for what nature has to offer at that
particular time of the year. The more you walk the woods and fields of
your area, the more keen your eyes become. You'll soon have a place to
collect your vines, another for collecting your nuts and others still
for your milkweed, moss and pinecones. (Did I mention that you'll be
walking a lot and getting some great exercise? What a terrific benefit
from this new interest!)

Think you may not have room for all this? If you decide to start
collecting nature supplies to create several wreaths for yourself, plus
a couple of gifts for friends, all you need is an area big enough to
hang your dried materials, room for a couple of trays of nuts, moss,
nests and fungi, and several cans to store your silica-gel flowers (more
on that later). You'll also need a worktable when you decide to put a
piece together. I often bring dried naturals home and hang them in the
kitchen or on the front porch.

When I go on a foraging walk, I take several large baskets with handles
and lots of bags. The baskets are great for flowers and grasses; the
bags work well for moss, nuts, etc. A friend of mine prefers a nylon bag
slung over his shoulder for everything.

Remember your hand clippers, as well as a canvas carpenter's apron with
lots of pockets to store your small collectibles in.

Different supply needs will take you to different places. Looking for
vines will take you to wooded roadsides, usually up or down an
embankment (remember to be careful). If you need some milkweed, Queen
Anne's lace or yarrow, a large open field is a good source. Moss and
fungi are usually found in the woods near streams or attached to the
undersides of logs.

**Vines**

The best time to collect vines is in the spring and fall. Grapevine,
bittersweet vine, forsythia, honeysuckle and thornless raspberry vines
may all be used for wreaths. Grapevine and bittersweet vine are easy to
locate in the fall, as their leaves are the first to turn yellow. To
remove grapevine and bittersweet vine from a tree, find a central vine
among the hanging mass and tug gently as you back away from the tree.
(The best-size vines are ½ inch in diameter or smaller, but using a
variety of widths adds interest to your wreath.) Many vines should come
out in a bunch. Final separation from the tree can be done with hand
clippers. Forsythia, honeysuckle and raspberry vines may be easily cut,
branch by branch, off the bush. Tie a rope around the vine mass to put
it in your car trunk or carry it home.

With your clippers, divide the vines into 7-foot sections, picking off
bark and scraggly tendrils (the curlicues). I keep the good tendrils on
the vine for a great woodsy look. Vines should be soaked overnight to
insure flexibility in winding.

I have an old bathtub outdoors and soak my vines in rainwater. You can
also use an old washtub, bending vines in a circle to fit. A good rainy
day will soak vines lying on the ground.

**Moss, Fungi and Wasp's Nests**

Sphagnum, lichen and bun moss are just a few of the varieties available
to pick - all offer different textures and shades of green. Some will
come right up off the ground in sheets. Stream banks and forest floors
are especially abundant with moss.

Larger fungi (called "punk" by some) are easily spotted growing on trees
and old stumps at eye level; smaller pieces grow underneath fallen
trees. The smaller ones can be gently picked or cut off. These come in
various colors and stripes and add contrast and texture to a wreath.

I gather old, vacant wasp's nests in February and March from the rafters
of our barn. (Spray first with a mild insect repellent if it makes you
feel better.) The honeycomb adds something unexpected to a wreath.

**Flowers and Weeds**

Goldenrod should be picked just as it turns yellow if you want the color
bright. Pick Queen Anne's lace in full bloom or dried in the fall.

Yarrow, teasels and grasses may be picked in different stages in varying
shades. Hydrangeas should be picked after they change color and become
slightly dry. Daisies and thistles should be picked in full bloom and
then dried in silica gel.

Cut flowers and weeds at the base of the plant (take gloves for teasels
and thistles). Daisies and Queen Anne's lace can be plucked off the stem
for wreath use.

Find acorns, pinecones and nuts on the forest floor and on the roads in
the fall; save and dry peach, apricot and plum seeds at home. Drying
your foraged treasures thoroughly is very important to your final
product. Drying kills any bugs or insects and preserves your material so
it will last.

**Hang Drying**

Hang drying of naturals can be done as easily as hammering in a couple
of nails, tying up a small rope line, or by using a wooden laundry rack.
I use pipe cleaners to wrap around the end of the flower bunch I'm
hanging and then secure it to the line or rack. Pipe cleaners work well
since your flowers will shrink as they dry, and the cleaners can be
easily adjusted. After blooms have thoroughly dried, store them in boxes
if you don't plan to use them right away, or set the bunches upright in
coffee cans or large vases. Whether the flowers are in the process of
drying or just in storage, make sure the room is dry, airy and where
things won't be touched or moved.

**Tray Drying**

Nuts, moss, fungi, bird's nests, pinecones, seeds and bark should be
placed on old cookie trays, screens, newspapers, or in shallow boxes to
dry thoroughly before use. A shelf in a dry, warm room or out in the sun
will do. Depending on the thickness of the material, these items can
take from several days to several weeks to dry.

Pinecones, seeds, nuts and leaves may also be dried in a moderately
heated oven until they lose all their moisture.

Store dried materials in coffee cans, boxes, or baskets, away from
moisture and dampness.

**Using Silica Gel**

Not all flowers retain their colors when dried naturally. The use of
silica gel, a sandlike product that thoroughly and quickly dries natural
materials, will preserve original colors very effectively.

I bought a five-pound can of silica gel in 1989 for \$16. It will last
me a lifetime. When my foraging year begins, my silica gel is always in
use, from the first spring blossoms until the last blooms of fall.

In the morning, after the dew has dried off the plants (you want to pick
when flowers are as dry as possible), cut a basket of blooms to be
dried. Handling the flower gently, cut the stem about an inch from the
blossom. Pour ½ inch of silica gel in the bottom of a cookie tin or
coffee can with a tight lid, then place flowers face down, being careful
not to let them touch. Gently pour enough silica gel to cover flowers
entirely, making sure to get the gel on all sides and between the
petals. Then continue adding layers until the tin is full, making sure
the last layer is silica gel. Cover tightly. More-delicate blossoms can
dry in two to three days. Thicker blossoms can take from one to 10 days
or sometimes more; all depends on the dryness of the bloom when it's
picked and the moisture in the air while it is drying. Drying your
flowers completely is very important.

Remember that reds will dry darker; whites will sometimes dry
translucent or cream-colored. Pinks, yellows, oranges, blues, greens and
purples will all dry and retain the same color as when you picked them.

When you think the blossoms are dry, gently dig one out and check. If
they are ready to be removed, carefully pour the silica gel out of the
tin, gently picking out your dried flowers as you go. A small paintbrush
is good for removing sand particles from your flowers. Between usage,
store silica gel tightly in its tin can.

Silica gel needs to be revived after three to four uses and even more
frequently in rainy weather. When the blue crystals turn pink, you know
it's time to recycle. Pour it on old cookie sheets about an inch thick
and dry in a 325 degrees Fahrenheit oven until the blue color reappears.
This will take anywhere from 30 minutes to an hour. I open the door of
the oven several times during this reviving process and wipe away any
moisture that builds on the oven door. Return the gel to its tin and
close tightly after it cools.

I store my silica-gel dried flowers in cookie tins or coffee cans and
then label them. It's important to keep moisture away from the tins and
to store them in a dry environment. If the flowers I've dried are thick
or the weather has been rainy, I throw a tablespoon or more of silica
gel in a labeled storage tin of already dried blossoms to help further
absorb moisture.

My silica-gel drieds are used in wreaths, pot pourri and natural
arrangements. After I secure them in a creation, I spray them lightly
with a clear acrylic to help further block out moisture. I wouldn't put
my most delicate silicagel creations outdoors in harsh weather or direct
sunlight, though I did keep a wreath outdoors last year through February
and March and it held up beautifully. I urge you to experiment. You'll
find silica gel so magical that you'll be waiting impatiently for your
first flowers to come up just so you can start preserving and creating
beautiful things.

**Milkweed Pods**

My favorite foraged treasure, milkweed pods - dried in different
shades - lend beautiful lines to your work. They have less tendency to
crack if you pick them up in the summer, when they are still green. Snip
the pods off and leave them in a box or bag for two or three days. This
starts the drying process gradually. Gently split the pods with your
thumbs and remove the insides, being careful not to damage the flesh of
the pod within. Fill a cookie sheet with empty pods and cook in a
325-degree oven until they start turning yellow, beige and brown and
seem to have dried completely. This method will give you a gorgeous
variety of colors and a long-lasting pod. You can still pick any pods
you see in fall or winter, but they'll tend to be brittle. Spray your
pods with clear acrylic for added strength and an attractive shine.

Once you've collected and dried whatever caught your eye on your walks
through the woods, you'll want to show off your bounty.

The following project - a vine wreath with milkweedpod flowers - is
excellent for first-time wreath makers. It's a great conversation piece
("Is that really a wasp's nest?"), and its natural beauty blends in with
almost any decor. And as you'll be gathering your own materials, the
price will be more than reasonable.

### How to Make a Fall Wreath With Milkweed-Pod Flowers {.level3}

Makes one 12-inch wreath.

**Supplies needed:**

15 to 20 7-foot lengths of grapevine (I used grapevine, but the vines
mentioned are fine)\
16 cooked milkweed pods (see previous instructions)

Make sure these materials are dried before using:\
2 large pieces of sphagnum moss\
10 hemlock pinecones\
15 stems of goldenrod\
15 stems of green oats\
15 stems of white yarrow\
25 heads of Queen Anne's lace\
4 small teasels\
6 sensitive ferns\
4 small wasp's nests\
6 small fungi\
4 bee-balm centers\
Assorted nuts, acorns and seeds for accent\
6 yellow or orange strawflowers\
10 yellow marigolds\
8 orange marigolds\
(The last three items I grow in my garden and silica-gel dry.)

**Other Supplies:**

15 strands of natural-color raffia\
Hot glue gun\
8 hot glue sticks\
Hand clippers\
Clear acrylic spray

**Instructions for vine base:**

1\. Soak grapevine sections overnight.

2\. Starting with one vine length, gently ease it into a circle,
intertwining the ends as you would tie something, leaving both ends
sticking out. (Don't clip ends until you have four or five vines wound;
there will be some give in the beginning.) Take your second vine and
tuck one end under the first vine (anywhere). Weave the vine over and
then under the first vine until it's completely wound around. Continue
weaving over and under with each vine. Take a look at your wreath as you
add more, checking the shape for roundness. You may have one side
looking fuller than the other - the less-full side is where you should
be weaving in more vines.

3\. Wind all your vines, peeling the bark off if you desire, cutting or
leaving the tendrils. Trim any ends of vines sticking out.

4\. Thoroughly dry your finished base either in the sun or near your
heater before you decorate. (The glue won't work on a wet base.) Note:
If a vine snaps or breaks while winding, don't be discouraged. Almost
all of my first-time students get a snap on their first try at winding.
It comes easily after a few attempts. Find another vine and try again.
Some breaks don't even have to be removed from the base; they can be
intertwined not to show. If all your vines are snapping, then they need
more soaking.

**Instructions for milkweed flowers:**

1\. Cook 16 milkweed pods (see previous instructions). Let cool.

2\. Arrange four pods in a star formation with their pod bases meeting
in the middle of the wreath.

3\. Apply glue to the side of one pod near the bottom and hold together
with adjacent pod for 1 minute or until they're glued together. Apply
glue to the bottom side of the second pod and hold with third pod for
another minute. Apply glue to the fourth pod on both bottom sides and
hold in the last slot until dry. Glue hemlock pinecone in the center.

4\. After all four are made, spray with clear acrylic for shine and
strength.

**Instructions for decorating the base:**

1\. Arrange four milkweed flowers on the right side of your vine base,
spacing them evenly.

2\. One at a time, check first to see where each milkweed flower touches
the base; then glue at these points. Glue all four flowers in place.

3\. Where your line of milkweed flowers ends at the top and bottom of
your wreath, glue sphagnum moss for about 6 more inches. This will serve
as a base to glue your drieds to. You'll be leaving part of your vine
base exposed. (Since you worked so hard on it, I think it's nice for
people to see it.) It will also be where you stick your bow later on.

4\. Plan to use half your dried material on one area of moss, the second
half for the other. Put aside five or six Queen Anne's lace heads, three
pieces of yarrow, some oats and three or four marigolds for filling in
between the milkweed pods.

5\. It's easiest to concentrate on one moss section at a time. Start
with four 3-inch pieces of goldenrod; space them equally around and glue
them to the moss - one at the end, two sticking out of the side and one
toward the middle of the wreath. Now take four pieces of oats and glue
in between the goldenrod, spacing evenly. (Basically, decorating a
wreath is learning to fill in one area at a time.) Next, take some
yarrow and add. Your area should be starting to fill in somewhat. If
there are gaps or holes, fill in with an extra piece or two of yarrow.

6\. Trim off the stems of your teasels and glue on the top part of the
moss, the other toward the end closer to the milkweed. Glue in several
small pieces of fungi, sensitive ferns and bee-balm middles. Make sure
things are spaced around evenly.

7\. Take three orange marigolds and two strawflowers and arrange them so
the color is distributed evenly. Glue them down.

8\. Add any nuts, seeds and wasp's nests you might want to use.

9\. Now stand back and take a look at what you've done thus far. (You
shouldn't be able to see any shape problems or holes when you're right
on top of the wreath. Standing back for a minute and getting a good
perspective is important in producing a professional-looking wreath.)
Queen Anne's lace is a super filler, so - still staying in one section -
fill any holes, even up the inner or outer sides, and add another piece
of color if needed. Now stand back again, and you should have your one
section full and finished.

10\. For your second moss section, follow the exact same procedures as
you did with the first (steps 5 through 9).

11\. Take the Queen Anne's lace, oats and yarrow you set aside and fill
in between the milkweed flowers.

12\. Stand back and look. The entire decorated side of your wreath
should have an evenness to it. You may find a need to fill in here or
there or a need for more color in places. Trust your own judgment and
add whatever is needed.

13\. The final touch is a raffia bow. Raffia looks super with all
natural work. Taking all your raffia strands with one hand, find the
midway point. Make a loop to one side; then take the bow and wrap it
around the loop and pull it through the knot. Even out the loops and
trim the raffia ends so they are also even. Glue your bow securely to
the middle of the exposed base of the vines.

14\. Lightly spray the dried-flower sections with clear acrylic.

Congratulations on completing your wreath! I'll bet you did a lot better
than you thought you would. You probably even surprised yourself by how
beautiful it looks.

I'm also sure you have more creative ideas on other natural wreaths you
want to make. It's time to take another walk, cut some different vines
and go out looking for more unique natural materials. Maybe try tying
the bow on the bottom or the top of the wreath next time; even no bow at
all looks great sometimes. Plan to cover the entire wreath base next
time and use it as a centerpiece. This is particularly beautiful when
combined with seasonal, freshcut flowers.

I'm always making two wreaths in my mind as I'm finishing up one. But
that's hardly a problem, because these lovingly made natural wreaths
make unique gifts all year round. Your friends will really appreciate a
present that comes from your own two hands (with a little help from
Mother Earth).

The abundance of natural material to be foraged and used, plus the
ever-changing textures and combinations that the fall season provides,
never fails to get me excited about creating with nature. So gather some
baskets, take a walk, and just think of all the possibilities.

*Susi Jacobson has foraged, created and sold natural wreaths for eight
years in rural Munster Pennsylvania, alongside the woodcarver Tom
McCarty and their daughter Holly. She teaches classes in natural designs
and foraging and is currently working on a how-to book.*

# Getting the Goods {#chapter023.html#h1-1 .level1a}

  ----------------------- ---------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------
  Natural Supplies        When to Forage                                 Drying Method
  Yarrow                  summer (white); fall (brown); winter (beige)   HD
  Goldenrod               summer through early fall - all stages         HD
  Goldenrod Bulb (Gall)   winter                                         HD
  Queen Anne's Lace       summer (white); fall (brown)                   HD & SG
  Moth Mullein            fall and winter                                HD
  Mullein                 fall and winter                                HD
  Black-eyed Susan        summer (flower); fall and winter (middle)      SG & HD
  Sensitive Fern          all year                                       HD
  Daisies                 summer                                         SG
  Corn Tassels            fall                                           HD
  Corn Husks              fall                                           TD
  Milkweed                late summer and fall                           Cook
  Hydrangeas              late summer and fall                           HD
  Thistles                summer                                         SG
  Teasels                 all year                                       HD
  Assorted Grasses        all year                                       HD
  Cattails                late summer                                    HD
  Cattail Reed            summer (green); fall and winter (beige)        HD
  Pinecones               all year                                       TD
  Moss                    all year                                       TD
  Fungi                   all year                                       TD
  Nuts, Acorns, Seeds     fall; some all year                            TD
  Sumac                   fall and winter                                TD
  Wasp's Nests            fall and spring                                TD (Double-check to make sure they are vacant.)
  Bird's Nests            all year                                       TD (Only ones found on the ground!)
  Pink Clover             summer                                         SG
  Butter and Eggs         summer                                         SG
  Bee Balm                summer and fall for flowers and middle         SG & HD
  Dock                    summer and fall                                HD
  Magnolia Leaves         fall                                           TD
  Grapevine               spring and fall are the best time              
  Bittersweet             fall for vine and orange berries               
  Raspberry Vine          without thorns spring and winter               
  Honeysuckle Vine        summer and fall                                
  Forsythia Vine          summer and fall                                
  TD = tray dry           HD = hang dry                                  SG = silica-gel dry
  ----------------------- ---------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-0)

PHOTO: GEORGIA O'BRIEN

A collection of supplies for making fall wreaths.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-1)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Grapevine
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-2)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Sphagnum Moss
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-3)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Yarrow
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-4)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Teasel
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-5)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Queen Anne's Lace
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-6.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-6)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Green Millet
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-7.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-7)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

Place foraged flowers gently into a tin of silica gel to dry.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-8.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-8)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

The vines will be supple and manageable if soaked overnight.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71390-9.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix020.html#a71390-9)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

The finished product: A natural vine wreath with milkweed flowers.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter024.html}

::: body
# [Earthship Homes: Affordable, Energy-Efficient Building](#toc.html#chap-24) {.chapter-title}

**Architect Michael Reynolds uses tires and aluminum cans to create
Earthships, energy-efficient homes that retain solar energy in their
walls. With this technique, you can build an affordable house without
any homebuilding expertise.**

**By Tim Knipe**

**October/November 1991**

Gray towers of rain march across the mesa. Yellow pitchforks of
lightning strike the earth amid the distant drone of successive
thunderclaps. Black clouds swirl across the blue sky, eclipsing the
sunlight and casting ominous shadows over the few dwellings that dot the
land. It is precisely these dwellings that have brought architect
[Michael Reynolds](http://earthship.net/) and myself to these 20 acres
outside Taos, N.M., on this darkening afternoon.

Reynolds had recently achieved some notoriety as the man who designed a
seemingly bizarre house made of tires for actor Dennis Weaver.
Unfortunately, most news accounts seem to spend more time on Weaver than
on explaining the theory behind the upcycling design. Much more than an
actor's folly, Weaver's house is the product of a long search by
Reynolds for an economical, self-sufficient form of house construction
that would also reduce the stress placed on the planet by conventional
building methods. In addition, the houses themselves would encourage a
lifestyle more in harmony with the natural order.

As the swollen thunderheads above prepare to loose their cargoes of
rain, Reynolds expresses outrage that the homeless problem currently
facing nearly every nation around the world today is completely
unnecessary. He contends that the high cost of housing is the result of
refusing to look at alternatives and to set affordability and
self-sufficiency as goals. "What other species on the planet could be in
this predicament?" Reynolds asks. "The mud wasps can all make mud nests;
beavers can all cut wood. People, on the other hand, are mostly helpless
when it comes to building their own homes. Housing has been taken away
from people."

For the past 20 years, through much trial and error, Reynolds has been
developing a building system which will, in effect, free people from the
tyranny of costly mortgages, energy bills and even part of their grocery
bills. He personally "test piloted" each experimental energy-efficient
structure along the way to ascertain how successful it was. The result
is a house design that satisfies his own rigorous criteria. In fact,
these are much more than the word "house" implies. Reynolds calls his
structures "Earthships" - vessels rooted in the earth, designed to carry
people through whatever the future brings: climate change, economic
adversity or famine, as well as peace and prosperity. Built primarily
from recycled materials (used tires and aluminum cans) and finished with
adobe mud, these passive solar Earthship homes can be constructed by
unskilled builders and inhabited with little, if any, dependence on the
power grid: Heating and cooling are based on a principle called "mass."
Power is gleaned from the sun or wind. It sounds outrageous but it seems
to work.

## Upcycled Home Design {.level2}

Reynolds is accustomed to the skeptical eye. After making up his mind
that his life would be better spent seeking appropriate shelter for
people rather than racing his motorcycles, he bought acreage that no one
else wanted outside Taos, N.M., for only \$350 an acre. This lack of
interest was based on an alleged lack of water, an allegation Reynolds
put to rest soon after the deed was signed. He found water all over the
place.

How? "Hired a water witch," Reynolds says with a shrug, referring to a
local dowser.

From the beginning, Reynolds felt that the key to his search lay in
combining an accessible building material with natural energy sources
such as sun and wind. In the early 70s, when Charles Kuralt began
broadcasting footage of streets and fields all across America littered
with beverage cans, it occurred to Reynolds that this abundantly
available resource could be used as a valuable building material.

He began his upcycling project by baling cans with wire into small
blocks. The design was patented but never really utilized because it was
too labor intensive. Instead, he began laying cans directly into cement
mortar, using them as bricks themselves. At first, the cans-in-mortar
construction was used to fill in between posts in more traditional
post-and-beam construction. This evolved into using cans alone in
dome-style construction. Exterior walls consist of two rows of cans
separated by an air space filled with insulation, then mudded over.

## The Thermal Mass House {.level2}

When the energy crunch hit in the mid-70s, heating and cooling became
costly factors in housing. Insulation became important. This led
Reynolds to explore the concept of mass, and thermal mass heat, in terms
of energy-efficient building. "Our houses are mass houses first and
solar houses second," explains Reynolds. "The principle of mass is best
illustrated by putting a tin pan and an iron skillet on the stove," he
continues. "Heat them both up. Turn the stove off. The tin pan cools
down almost immediately. The iron skillet will burn your hand ten or
fifteen minutes later. That's the issue." The trick is to capture
energy. Because matter is essentially stored energy, it can be defined
as a battery. The denser the matter-mass, the more stored energy is
present. Iron is denser than tin, hence the skillet stays hotter longer
than the tin pan. Air has no mass, therefore no ability to retain
temperature. Conventional houses have very little mass and, therefore,
must be insulated to retain temperature. In a Reynolds house, or
Earthship, the walls themselves, because of their extremely concentrated
mass, retain temperature. More than keeping cool or warm air in, the
walls become, according to Reynolds, the primary home temperature
control. The secondary source is the sun, or in extremely dark
environments, gas heat.

"Our bodies are mass", says Reynolds. "We are 89 percent water. We need
food, and food turns into energy. Energy makes heat so that our bodies
can maintain 98 degrees Fahrenheit while we're standing in a 20-degree
Fahrenheit air temperature around us. If we didn't have mass in our
bodies, we would be eating all the time to maintain body heat. But our
bodies are batteries that hold heat so we don't have to eat all the
time. Houses are the same way. Traditional houses have no mass, so we
spend all our time and money to constantly feed our homes energy."

Mass is subtle, in Reynolds's estimation. "Sun comes and goes, like
right now we have no sun," he points out as we drive across the
rainswept mesa. "At night we've got no sun. But mass never leaves. Mass
is always there. If you can have a blast of water for five minutes,
that's great, but if you can have a drip for five years, that's better.
Mass is that way. I'm more impressed with mass than I am with the sun.
Once you achieve mass, it never goes away.

Reynolds explains that if the base of the Earthship homes are below the
frost line, the depth to which the ground freezes, the temperature of
the mass walls will stay at 59 or 60 degrees, which is the ambient
temperature of the earth below that point. "Just as in a cave, the
temperature will never go lower or higher unless you make it lower or
higher. So without any input whatsoever, you're going to be able to
remain at 59 or 60 degrees Fahrenheit. And that's livable," he adds with
a smile, "no matter what happens."

Earthship homes are oriented toward the south and in some cases slightly
to the east where maximum exposure to the sun is important. The southern
wall is slanted and constructed entirely of framed glass. Ideally, the
southern wall should contain the only glass in the structure as well as
the only entrance, to maximize the mass of the three other sides. In
Taos, at an elevation of 7,000 feet, winter temperatures reach minus 30
degrees, and summer temperatures can top out in the 100s; the walls of
these houses maintain a mean temperature of 65 to 75 degrees without
additional cooling or heating sources.

## A House Made of Tires {.level2}

In developing the Earthship design, Reynolds kept his eye on two key
factors: cost and sustainability. To be truly sustainable for the long
term, he felt that structures must "join with the earth, not resist it."
Thus, in addition to the mass of the structure's walls, the natural
elements of the earth itself are included. Earthship homes are partially
submerged in the ground, with the excavated soil piled nearly to the
roof on the northern face.

All of the exterior walls, except for the glass one, have as their main
component steel-belted radial tires filled with dirt: extremely
economical and extremely dense. In addition to being ideal for achieving
mass, tires are tremendously abundant - to the point that their disposal
has become a major environmental problem. According to the Environmental
Protection Agency, approximately 240 million tires are discarded in the
United States every year. Finding a place to put them is a difficult
task. Most landfill operators will not take them because they have a
macabre tendency to rise to the surface once the dump is covered over,
similar to the protagonists of the classic film *Night of the Living
Dead.* An environmental version could be *The Tires That Wouldn't Die.*

As a result, tire dealers pay haulers anywhere from 25 to 50 cents a
tire to remove them to a stockpile area where they are stacked for an
indefinite period of time. An alternative is to shred, which cures their
inclination toward resurrection but is also costly. It is no surprise
then that most tire dealers welcome any suggestion that would rid them
of the used tires in an economical way. If people want to build houses
with them, that's just fine.

In Reynolds' houses, the tires are layered in staggered courses similar
to bricks. Each tire is put into place empty and then filled with dirt
from the excavation. The loose dirt is pounded into the tire rim and
more dirt successively is added until the tire is rock solid and all but
immovable. The fact that tires come in different sizes adds to their
appeal as a building material. The base of the wall is laid with No.
16s, the body with No. 15s, tapering off at the top with No. 14s. Each
wall averages about three feet thick, with a finish coat of plaster or
adobe.

The unusual thickness of the walls allows for a wide distribution of the
weight actually reaching the ground. This qualifies them as structural
bearing walls, and their width eliminates the need for additional
footings or foundations. In fact, to prove how much weight these tire
walls are capable of supporting, Reynolds drove a filled cement mixer on
top of one wall. The exposed tires did not even compress under the
weight.

Of course, before beginning construction in any new location, local
building codes must be satisfied. Reynolds has had engineers examine the
walls and testify that they meet and even surpass any existing codes.
One engineer claimed that the tire-construction system would be suitable
for a dam.

## Building An Earthship {.level2}

Earthships are the result of 20 years of experimental work to develop a
thermal mass house built with recycled materials. These structures have
been analyzed favorably by various engineers and gas building
authorities and have met and exceeded uniform building codes. They have
also been financed by conventional lending institutions. Many have been
built by the owners themselves with laborers who have little or no
construction experience. (Other Earthships have been built by
professional construction companies and the rest by Michael Reynolds
himself). Though most have been built in the West, Earthship homes can
be built anywhere.

Earthships, like a seafaring ship, are meant to be self-contained,
independent, and carry the inhabitant to a better future. They
consistently cost about 25 percent less than equivalent designs built of
conventional materials. Involvement by the owner can further reduce the
\$25 per square foot base cost (one 1,600-square-foot house cost \$20
per square foot). When properly executed, Earthships require no backup
heating or cooling due to their ability to tap into the constant
temperature of the earth itself and store additional energy from the sun
in winter. They can be built in almost any climate because, even without
adequate sunlight, the thermal mass helps to alleviate the strain on
external conventional energy sources. Most Earthships are designed to
grow food inside, and some maintain their own solar electrical systems;
thus, Earthships can go where utility lines do not.

The basic structure of Earthships consists of bearing walls made of
tires and pounded earth. Packing dirt into the used tires results in
what has been called a "rubber-encased adobe brick." The details are
very similar to adobe construction, with tires laid in staggered
coursings like bricks. Every room is based on a module (a "U") of three
3-foot-thick temperature-storing walls that act like a thermal mass
battery - storing up excess energy and discharging it when needed. The
fourth "wall" faces south and is open to the energy of the sun. This
basic structure takes no skill to execute, and when operated by the
owner is virtually cost-free. A 1,500-square-foot Earthship uses
anywhere from 500 to 700 tires, which can be "pounded out" by two people
in less than a month (25 to 40 tires can be pounded by two people per
8-hour day, depending on the conditions present as well as the endurance
and strength of the builders).

The roof is made of beams spanning from bond beams on the top of each
wall. The beams are decked, well-insulated, and roofed with earth bermed
up over the rear of the structure so that the Earthship is effectively
buried on three sides. This method makes Earthship homes ideal for a
gentle, south-facing slope - the Earthship is simply "carved" out of the
hillside.

Minor interior "partition walls" are made from aluminum cans laid in
cement mortar. Cans, like the tires, are also used like bricks - except
that it takes much less skill to lay a can than a brick. But since they
are so lightweight, much more dynamic forms can be created with cans.
Underground domes, vaults and arches have been built with this "aluminum
brick" using relatively unskilled labor. Inside the Earthship, cans are
used to build curved walls, bathtubs, stairs, and many other "living"
features.

All surfaces, tires and cans are filled out with mud or cement to smooth
planes and finished in the same way conventional adobe houses are
finished. Interior walls are usually covered with a mud-plaster finish
common to the Southwest but applicable anywhere. Mud walls can be
painted with latex paint or durable finishes. Once finished, tire and
can construction becomes indistinguishable from conventional methods.

Electrical and plumbing rough-ins are somewhat unique to this system,
but still require no extra time or materials. Materials needed for
construction are available anywhere in the country - your local
automobile service center will be happy to be relieved of useless used
tires. Best of all, you'll cut down on the millions that are dumped into
the nation's landfills.

## Shape and Function {.level2}

To make the most of the mass, the tire walls are layered in U-shapes, or
modules. Each Earthship is comprised of a series of these U-modules
placed side by side, stepped back and above the other, or in a combined
layout. The stepped-back approach is most suitable when building up a
mountain or on a large hillside.

The most common is the side-by-side configuration. In each case, the
object is to make every room a battery. The open end of the U faces
south, which allows the sun to warm the interior. Access between rooms
is best arranged through a common hallway along the south wall. This
maintains the integrity of the mass walls of the U-modules. Any mass
that is removed by adding a doorway or window diminishes the efficiency
of the battery effect.

While a U can be as small as the builder wants, there are restrictions
on how large it can be. The maximum span between the legs of the U
should not exceed 18 feet. A larger span would require roof beams that
would be too large to be manageable. A U should also not be deeper than
26 feet to efficiently utilize the mass of the walls. If the total area
exceeds 18-by-26 feet, there will not be enough mass to heat the
resulting volume of air.

## Food Independence {.level2}

One important aspect of sustainability is access to a steady,
predictable supply of unpolluted food. The best way to accomplish this
is to grow your own.

"I see food as being as big an issue as architecture, energy, money and
recycling," Reynolds says. To enable people to become less susceptible
to threats from chemicals, pesticides and food additives, Reynolds has
incorporated a greenhouse into his Earthship design.

Even before he filled his first tire with dirt, Reynolds was
experimenting with the greenhouse concept. Many of the test houses on
his initial 20 acres of mesa land contain greenhouses. One of them,
which bears a strong resemblance to a lunar landing module, includes a
two-story greenhouse with a thriving banana tree. In addition, he is
experimenting with citrus, nut and avocado trees, as well as a host of
different vegetables and herbs.

He has even considered agriculture in designing Earthship plumbing.
Sewage is divided at the source into gray water and black water. Only
black water, which comes from the toilet, is routed to a septic tank in
the ground. The gray water - all sink, tub, and laundry water - is
routed into holding tanks for use in greenhouse irrigation. The food
particles that drain from the kitchen sink are particularly nutritious
for the plants.

## Off Grid Living {.level2}

Another aspect of sustainability is eliminating dependence on the
community power grid supplied by the local utility company. To
accomplish this, Earthship homes rely on renewable sources of energy,
such as solar and wind. The houses in Taos obtain their power primarily
through solar panels mounted on the roof. Aside from the fact that
during a power blackout their lights will still be twinkling and their
ice cream will remain frozen, Earthship dwellers need never pay another
utility bill. This fact speaks directly to more humane economics
regarding housing.

Also, by not relying on the power grid, people are able to buy land that
would not appeal to most developers because running utilities to it
would be too expensive. Therefore, the cost of the land can be very low.
Earthships, in their currently evolved form, can be built for as little
as \$20 per square foot, as compared with \$50 to \$75 dollars a square
foot for traditional woodframe construction.

In effect, Earthship residents can live well on a very limited income, a
feeling Reynolds describes in terms more appropriate to intoxication.
One couple began work on a tire house with a total investment of
\$15,000. They had intended to build two houses. When one was finished,
they became so enthralled by living without expenses that work slowed to
a crawl on the second. Instead, they went skiing, hiking and camping,
enjoying freedom as if it were a new toy.

## Economic Freedom {.level2}

In Reynolds' mind, this is the type of freedom that was intended when
the country was founded. He believes that since the signing of the
Declaration of Independence, a different kind of oppression has evolved,
one orchestrated through economics. The banks run most people's lives.
Even the wealthy are paying great sums regularly to lending
institutions, utility companies, grocery stores and restaurants. It is a
self-perpetuating lifestyle that requires a constant flow of money to
maintain, no matter what the level on the economic scale. And this style
of living trickles down to those who can no longer afford the stakes of
the game: the homeless people who walk the streets of every urban area
in growing numbers.

Reynolds is proving that this does not have to be the case. People can
live for very little money, in real economic freedom. "You can preach
and argue in Congress until you're dead, and you won't change much of
anything. Building Earthships doesn't involve any of that," Reynolds
explains. "In spite of the law, in spite of politics and in spite of the
economy, people will be free. And it's a quiet thing. I don't have to
argue or make people angry. This is just a quiet thing that's
happening."

One person it's happened to is Bob Allison, builder of five Earthships
and owner of The Allison Company, a luxury custom- home builder in
Ridgway, Colorado. "I was the biggest skeptic you can imagine when I
first heard about tire houses, and now I'm their best salesman." Though
an Earthship convert, Allison still has the same reaction every time he
sees one. "Even now, when I see one of these things going up in the
beginning, I think it's all crazy," Allison says. "But when you see the
finished product, you think it's great. It's a revolution in building."

Earthship owner Pat Habicht is equally enthusiastic, so much so that she
built two Earthship homes. "This is the nicest and most interesting
house I have ever lived in. I was disgusted with all the other
architects I consulted when I decided in April 1989 to build a solar
house. Michael was the only one who understood." It took Habicht, 58,
six months to build her 1,400-square-foot home, working eight-hour days.
Even after all the work, Habicht insists it's the way to go. "I love it.
Not only do we recycle material for building, but the solar aspect saves
trees from being cut for heating." Last winter, Habicht burned only one
cord of wood between her two homes. Even as temperatures outside dipped
to less than 30 degrees, her Earthships stayed comfortable.

Maintenance is easy, too. Habicht reports that her only upkeep is oiling
the wood on the exterior facade to protect it from the dry New Mexico
weather. Her monthly expenses are only \$20 for electric (one of her
homes is on the power grid; the other runs on a photovoltaic system that
cost Pat \$5,000 to install) and \$10 for gas.

Despite these ringing endorsements from builders and Earthship owners
and his own increasing celebrity, Reynolds does encounter skeptics from
time to time. "There are people whose lifestyle it doesn't fit,"
Reynolds says. Even those in his profession were critical. "In the early
days, other architects said I was piling junk, not building a house. But
they're coming around."

## Earthship Community {.level2}

Now that Reynolds has convinced himself and others that the Earthship
concept works, he has gone on to a larger scale - an Earthship
community. Rural Earthship Alternative Community Habitat (REACH) is
currently being initiated on a mountainside 8 miles from Taos. Reynolds
has purchased 55 acres and begun implementing a program whereby people
can own their own lot for a minimum investment of \$1,000. The basic
deed restriction is that only Earthships may be built there.

The community will be totally self-sustaining and the people who build
the community will live in the community. Reynolds is particular about
who will be involved. People have already offered big money for a piece
of the land to develop themselves. Reynolds is not interested.

"We don't need money," he says. "Money is not the point. REACH is for
the people. The people build it themselves out of what society discards,
proving that money is irrelevant. What I am trying to do here is educate
people about this concept, show them firsthand that it can be done and
how to do it and then let them go out into the world and start these
communities themselves, all over the world. There is no place that REACH
can't work."

At the core of all Reynolds's efforts is a paradigm, which he sets forth
as we leave the mesa, amid continuing atmospheric pyrotechnics, and head
toward his own Earthship and a warm dinner. "Look at the trees. They sit
there and they don't have to move. They take their water from the
ground. They take their energy from the sky. Their foliage drops down
and enhances the soil for their babies to grow in. Without even moving,
they have their whole system worked out.

"What we're trying to do with these Earthships," Reynolds concludes, "is
make a way for human life to live as intelligently as plant and animal
life."

Sitting around the dinner table later that night, watching the rain
course down the Earthship's sloped glass walls, it is difficult not to
feel that the route to preserving this planet may actually lie in
something as simple as building houses out of used tires. History will
certainly attest to the human predisposition for accepting complex
answers only to find the true solutions in elegant simplicity. Take the
wheel, for example.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Michael Reynolds: Vital Statistics {.level2}

**Family**: Wife, Chris; daughter, Tanya; son, Justin; son, Jonah\
**Education**: Bachelor of' Architecture, University of Cincinnati,
1969\
**Awards (among others):** Burlington House Award for Interiors, 1975;
Terra Alpha Technical Award, 1990\
**Honors (among others):** Consultant for the Venezuelan government on
using recycled material for housing, 1976; photographs of first models
hang in Louvre along with an aluminum can "brick"\
**Highlights**: Senior thesis, "Urban Housing Complexes," included in
the Architectural Record, 1971; featured in *AIA* magazine (Architects
Institute of America, a prestigious architectural journal); has been
profiled in more than 27 publications, including twice in *National
Geographic*; has been seen on CNN, Ted Turner's *Network Earth*, and
*Good Morning America*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Material in this article originally appeared in the Calypso Log © 1990
The Cousteau Society, Inc.- Mother*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71392-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix021.html#a71392-0)

 

DEBBE SHARPE

Mike Reynolds' Earthship. The house is literally carved out of the
hillside.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71392-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix021.html#a71392-1)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

Tires are laid in courses, like bricks. Cans are used for interior walls
as well as exterior construction.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71392-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix021.html#a71392-2)

 

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

By leaving the south side of the Earthships exposed to the sun, Mike
Reynolds' tire houses are heated almost entirely by passive solar
heating combined with the principles of mass.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71392-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix021.html#a71392-3)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

Steel-belted walls: A closeup of the tire courses.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71392-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix021.html#a71392-4)

 

DEBBIE SHARPE

Archetecture students as well as future Earthship owners can get
hands-on training, as Mike Reynolds (with beard) leads a seminar on
building an Earthship.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71392-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix021.html#a71392-5)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

Archetecture students as well as future Earthship owners can get
hands-on training, as Mike Reynolds (with beard) leads a seminar on
building an Earthship.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter025.html}

::: body
# [How To Build A Dry Stone Wall](#toc.html#chap-25) {.chapter-title}

**Learn how to build a dry stone wall including choosing stones,
equipment, layout, ends and corners.**

**By John Vivian**

**October/November 1991**

Learning how to build a dry stone wall takes a little bit of time,
muscle and some trial and error, but the beauty that results from
building with natural stone and your own two hands is second to none.

If you stop and think about it, it seems that, written word aside, the
most enduring monuments to man's creativity and hard work are built of
stone. The Pyramids, in Egypt, the Great Walls of China and Peru,
temples most everywhere from Latin America to India, the castles of
Europe, and the mile upon mile of stone walls running through our own
New England countryside were all laid by hand and without a speck of
mortar.

They endure in part because rock is as near a definition of "forever" as
exists. But more important is their main construction ingredient -
gravity. In a properly built stone wall each rock sits square on the
ones below it, and so long as gravity keeps pulling, that wall is going
to stay put.

So, here's how to go out and build a really permanent monument to
yourself. Do it right - square, plumb, and well-tied throughout - and
the wall will be standing long after you and I and all our other
accomplishments and failings are forgotten.

First, get a pair of well-fitting steel-toed boots with ankle-, or
better yet, calf-length uppers made from stiff, thick leather. Next, buy
a pair of horsehide work gloves or a pair molded of rubber with grit
imbedded into the palm and fingers. These gloves work well when gripping
stones, and the boots will keep your toes from getting dented when you
drop a boulder on your foot - which is bound to happen at one time or
another. Finally, be sure you have the needed time and ambition.

There is no such thing as a half-built stone wall. It's either a wall or
a stone pile. And to get from one to the other takes a lot of lifting -
a cubic foot of rock weighs the better part of a hundred pounds.

So a little decorative wall only 3 feet high, two feet wide, and 20 feet
long weighs some 5 tons or more (depending on the amount of air space
built in) and comprises a thousand or more average-size stones. If you
have to fetch stones from somewhere, there is the loading and unloading
in addition to the building to consider. That little 20-foot wall can
have a man lifting well over 20 tons of dead weight before it is
finished.

(If you're old enough to remember listening to *Fibber McGee* and Molly
or Your Hit Parade-before television-I strongly suggest you get your
physician's okay before taking on a stone wall, especially if you're a
desk worker and unused to strenuous labor.)

In any event, plan to take your time and use carts, ramps, barrows, and
levers to move larger stones. There's little point in hurrying to
complete a wall that will likely endure into the next millennium. And no
point at all in busting a gusset doing it. There's a right and a wrong
way to lift. Just keep your back straight and the stones close to your
body. Lift with your legs and arms, not with your back - at least not if
yours is as easily sprung as mine.

### Picking Your Stone {.level3}

Building stone walls begins with the first step: finding stone. Most
everything I've read about building with stone assumes you have a
sufficient supply of "good," easy-to-build-with stones with three or
four flat sides. And they suggest that if you don't have enough good
stone lying around your property, you can buy or quarry it or dress your
rounded stones flat.

Quarrying by hand and dressing stone is devilishly hard work, and paying
to have rock trucked any distance is expensive. Certainly, good stones
are easier to build with and make a classier-looking wall. But if some
or all of the stones you have are in the "not-so-good" category, go
ahead and plan to use them anyway. We'll discuss using both kinds for
wall construction.

Probably the best wall stones come from hard shales and schists - rock
types that developed flat cleavage planes during metamorphism that split
out into layers with flat tops and bottoms. Many will break naturally
into stones with flat sides as well. Others may not come with good flat
faces, but can be dressed quite easily. I've worked with some
metamorphic stone that split almost as easily as a block of wood.

Hardest to build with are igneous stones found in fields or running
water. Glacial action or gradual erosion in a stream will round even
these very dense and hard rocks. Though nearly all rock has a "grain,"
or a tendency to split along a fairly flat place, finding the grain in
granite and the like is difficult, and splitting faces off small rocks
takes more time and effort than it is worth.

Sedimentary rock formations, having been laid down in sheets, tend to
occur in layers - properly called strata. Most are relatively soft, and
easily split or cut by nature or a quarrier into good building stone.
But they also wear faster than other kinds of rock. Windborne particles
will wear down sandstone in time, and limestone gradually gets eaten
away by the natural acids in rainwater. A sandstone or limestone wall
might not hold up for more than 10 or 12 thousand years!

Besides its good breaking tendencies, metamorphic rock is usually
durable - even though it is often soft and easily worked. Marble is the
traditional medium of sculptors, and much ancient Greek and Egyptian
marble sculpture has withstood wind and rain for thousands of years.
Another metamorphic rock, slate, was used for gravestones by the
earliest settlers in America. Go to an old Colonial graveyard; you'll
note that it is the slate stones whose inscriptions are still sharp and
clear. Markers made from igneous rock have nearly worn flat.

### Sources of Stone {.level3}

Lacking a supply of stones on your own place and not wanting to buy
them, you can look several places. Perhaps another landowner will let
you haul off rocks from his walls or abandoned stone buildings. Rock
ramps, cellars, and foundations left after an old house or barn has
burned down provide one of the best "good" stone sources you can find.
Often these old cellar holes are dangerous or an eyesore, and owners are
glad to have part of the demolition or fill-in job done for free.

Construction sites often provide excellent flat-sided rock picking,
especially where new highways are dynamited through hilly country. Some
streams, rivers, lakes, and seashores are good sources for frost-split
or water-rounded stones. And you'll find that stones only weigh half as
much moved under water.

If there are a good many old stone buildings or foundations in your
area, you may find abandoned quarries or gravel pits scattered
throughout the countryside that were dug by the original stone builders.
Ask around, or consult a U.S. Geological Survey topographical map.
Abandoned and active quarries and gravel pits are shown on these
detailed maps.

### Equipment for Building With Stone {.level3}

I've found one of the handiest pieces of wall-building equipment -
better than a wheelbarrow - to be one of those high-wheeled, box-shaped
garden carts. You can tie one up on its square end and just roll the
stones in. (Don't overload it, as I once did, and have a wheel collapse
on you.) Used sensibly, the carts save much lifting, and you can run
larger stones up planks to the wall top with one.

Other tools include a yardstick, a hank of stout cord, several stakes a
foot or so longer than the wall height, a line level to go on the cord,
a mason's level, and perhaps a long and true board to tie to, plus a
good digging spade.

To move larger rocks around, you'll need a long (5 feet or more) steel
crowbar and a smaller crowbar, or pinch bar, that has one curved end.
Another device is the hoe/pic. This tool is 26 inches long, weighs about
4 pounds, and is somewhat expensive (about \$17). However, it has many
uses-pick, wedge, pry bar, and hoe. Its versatility goes beyond
stone-wall building and has a decided advantage over conventional pry
bars when you're digging large boulders that are embedded in the ground.
You'll also need a collection of thick planks and short lengths of 1 ½
or 2-inch iron pipe to serve as rollers if you are working with really
big stones.

If you plan to do any trimming or dressing of stones, get a pair of
safety goggles. Rock can splinter into razor-sharp fragments, and even a
dull chunk in an eye can mean trouble. Be sure the goggles are well
ventilated so they won't fog up on you during a hot day's work.

For trimming and dressing you should have a set of mason's or
geologist's hammers and chisels. These come in a variety of widths and
shapes, and are used mainly for scoring and splitting both brick and
stone. A relatively new tool available to stone builders is the
rockhound's gad-pry bar (about \$7). Used with a heavy crack hammer,
this 18-inch tool easily open seams and crevices in stone. It has two
hammering faces that pen-nit you to drive the bar down into a seam and
then drive it to the side to force the crack or seam apart.

Hammers come in two types. The first has a head with a flat side and a
wedgeshaped side - this is the traditional stonemason's hammer. The
other, a Bush hammer, has a flat, toothed head for really getting a
purchase on a piece of rock. You can also get a lightweight mason's
hammer shaped like a geologist's pick. It is for more delicate work and
has a small pounding face and a long, thin chipping blade on the other
side.

### Laying Out the Wall {.level3}

To get the essentials down pat, let's build a section of a basic
3-by-2-foot wall (it doesn't matter what kind of stone we use as the
principles of wall building are pretty much the same). If the wall is to
run along your property line, be sure that the whole thing is within
your boundaries, unless your neighbor is eager to share in the cost,
construction, and upkeep of a shared wall.

In the old days, New England farmers would patrol shared stone fences
every spring, each replacing the smaller winter-dislodged stones on his
own side, and joining forces on the big ones.

As the crochety Yankee farmer in Robert Frost's *Mending Wall* puts it,
"Good fences make good neighbors." Don't know as I agree with the
sentiment (Frost didn't). I'd say: Don't build a shared fence astride
your property line unless you are *already* good neighbors and plan to
remain so for the next several generations.

First, lay out an outline the full length and width of the wall with
cord looped to short sticks. For a curved wall you may want to lay out a
thick rope or garden hose to describe a fair curve.

If you can't avoid them, grub out any trees, stumps, or underbrush in
the wall's area. Remember: That little maple sapling a few feet from the
wall is going to grow. In time its roots will heave the rock, and the
trunk may expand and push the wall aside. Cut it down.

A low wall can be built right on the ground. In a few years the lowest
stones will sink into the sod a bit and no one will know the difference.
It is better stonemasonary, though, and will make for a sturdier wall,
if you dig out sod and topsoil so the footing - the lower courses or
layers of rock - rests on the underlying subsoil or hardpan.

In most places where you find plenty of native rock, the topsoil layer
will be shallow (a foot or less deep), and removing it will be a minor
chore, likely turning up an additional supply of rocks in the bargain.
In some valley and lowland areas with deep, loamy topsoil a stone wall
set just on the surface would gradually sink out of sight. But then, I
don't think an honest stone wall would be comfortable in the flatlands.

Footing trench or no, the next step is to lay out your batter boards -
stout stakes hammered in to mark the four end comers of the wall. Put
the stakes in good and deep and use your mason's level to make them
plumb - straight up in all dimensions. Make sure the tops of the stakes
are several inches higher than the planned wall.

Next, tie your cord to the four stakes at wall-top height and stretch
the cord as tight as you can. Every 6 to 10 feet, on both sides of the
wall, hammer in more stakes. Make sure they are outside the wall area so
string touches the inner-facing sides of each stake. You may tie or
staple line to the stakes if building up or down grade or if the wind is
bellying the upwind line on you. (A good many wall builders, this writer
included, have neglected to use the auxiliary stakes only to find that
their supposedly straight wall ended up with a slight curve due to a
prevailing wind blowing the guidelines.)

Now, attach the line level to the cord and adjust until all four sides
and both ends are level. This will define the approximate plane of the
top of your wall. For the most pleasing appearance, sturdiest
construction, and most satisfaction from the work, the wall top should
be flat and level from side to side, either following the lay of the
land in the long dimension or remaining horizontal, following the grade
in carefully graduated steps.

On a grade or flat, courses should be about the same thickness, each
course running horizontally - parallel to the level. Sides of the wall
should be vertical, or in higher walls they should have a slight inward
slope (a slight batter) on each side. Ends and comers should be square
and vertical.

This isn't feasible 100 percent of the time with stone, but try to keep
all dimensions as plumb and square as you can. You'll probably be
looking at that wall for the rest of your life. Come fire, bail, or high
water, it may be the one thing standing for your great-grandkids to
remember you by.

Remember that gravity pulls straight down: Unless the wall rests on a
flat, horizontal, and level plane (or sections rest on a succession of
flat steps on hilly ground), gravity will slowly pull your wall
downhill. So either level out the ground or dig footings with bottoms
having a plane parallel to the guideline.

A lot of people will tell you to put your biggest, flattest-shaped
stones at the bottom of the footing - then later on tell you to save
them for the topping course. Having worked mainly with odd-shaped stones
the glaciers left in our cornfields, I pick the absolute worst stones
for the bottom, the ones with not a single flat surface or with
oddshaped protuberances. I find the least unreasonable side, then bury
the stone in whatever shape hole is needed to get the best side exposed
at the depth I want the bottom of the first course to run.

The objective in all this is to give the wall a good, level base to rest
on. Even if you must dig a series of notches in a hillside, your wall
will be the better for it. In all below-grade work, keep stones several
inches apart, filling the open space with smaller rocks. This will
permit water to drain through easily.

The footing course or courses should be laid to be a bit lower in the
center-higher out at the edges. This slight "V" angle is often
maintained throughout construction. Thus the outer walls of the
structure lean in against themselves. Gravity helps keep the wall
standing by pulling rocks down as well as "in" toward the wall's center.

### Aboveground Building {.level3}

With the footing laid to ground level, lower the guidelines to what will
be the top of the first aboveground course. This should be the average
height of the thickest, heaviest rocks you have. No point in lifting
them any higher than necessary.

Do try to save the flattest rock with the most uniform thickness for the
top. The bigger the better, though don't save any stones, no matter how
flat they are, so large you can't handle them easily at the top.

Now begin layering the wall. Keep the best flat face of the narrow
dimensions of each stone facing out when possible. Be sure each stone is
bedded solidly on the stones below it. If a stone wobbles, it is better
to chip off a wobble knob or dig out a hole or make a joint in the rock
below than try to shim it up with smaller rocks and wedges. If you do
use smaller rocks to get the wobble out of a big stone, be sure they are
wedged in tight and held in place by other large rocks.

Keep the guidelines level, and continually sight along the side of the
course, adjusting rock placement with level and yardstick to make sure
all remain square.

To be sure the sides are as vertical as possible, or that they slope
inward at the desired angle, hang a small pebble from a length of
string. Put a bent wire on the other end and hang it from the guide
line. Run the plumb bob along as you lay up wall. Keep moving the
guidelines up as you finish each course.

With a small wall only a couple of feet wide and with reasonable luck in
getting good stones, your courses will seldom be more than two stones
wide, and many of the bigger stones will reach all the way across.

Don't use any small stones in the outer faces; they'll be the most
likely to work loose in time. Put the little stuff in the interior to
fill gaps between the larger stones.

Often you'll find a good-fitting stone that is too big; one end or
corner sticks out. Take your wide chisel, score all around the chunk you
want to remove - score one-half to one-eighth inch deep all the way
around if you can. Then knock off the extra. You may have to get some
heavyduty equipment such as a heavy sledge. If the steel strikes cause
sparks, then you probably have an igneous rock and should find another
place for it to fit.

With good, longish, relatively flat stones, you should never have a
vertical fissure in the wall that extends up from course to course. In
other words, each rock should rest on at least two others in the course
below, and joints between stones should not extend from course to
course. Too many such adjacent joints are called a "run" and greatly
decrease your wall's stability.

You may not see it move, but any dry-laid (mortarless) wall is in
continuous motion during settling, as soil is moved around underneath by
flowing water and, in the North, by the freezing and thawing of the
earth.

With too much run, these stresses will concentrate at the weakest point,
where a joint extends through two or more courses. In effect, the wall
will try to fold there, and in time will fall.

Another topic of dispute is chinking: Do you chink in or out? That is,
when rock surfaces don't mate well or where there is a substantial gap
in a face, do you fill these holes with shim rocks laid big-end inside
the wall (chinked "out")? Or do you hammer in a wedge-shaped shim from
the outside (chinked "in")? I do it both ways.

Gophers, squirrels, woodchucks, and all manner of other wildlife find a
stone wall a natural-grown homesite. The wiggling of a litter of rabbits
can dislodge a stone that is too small or poorly set. So can a dog dig
ging for a chipmunk, or the steps of youngsters, or hunters walking the
top of the wall.

From time to time - every 6 to 8 feet if you can - place a long stone
with its longest axis aiming into, rather than along, the wall.
Alternate sides when "tying" the wall, as this is called. The tie stones
keep the wall from merely being two unattached outer layers; the tie
stones literally tie one face to the other.

### Ends and Corners {.level3}

Save the best rocks, those most nearly rectangular and of even
thickness, for ends and comers. A wall end must stand on its own, and
for appearance's sake the end stones should have at least one good
square corner - or those at the outside edges should. The top stones
should be the biggest you can handle. I like to keep the longest rocks
for ends, so they can extend as far back into the wall as possible. It
is also a good idea to have ends particularly well-tied crosswise.

Corners are more complicated still. First, you want to tie your comer
into both lengths of wall - which is to say that in each course it is
well to have an extra-long rock extending from the comer into both the
north/south and the east/west length of wall. If you lack enough long
stones to tie into both walls during each course, alternate them - tying
first into one, then the other.

From the footing course up, you must take another precaution. Remember
that the comer must withstand the expansion and contraction coming from
both lengths of wall. A bias toward the lay-up pattern of one length
over the other would cause the corner to work loose in time.

So try not to let any edge of any rock line up with any *joint* in the
course below. Or, don't let the *edge* of any rock line up with the edge
of a rock below - except, of course, on the outer and inner faces.

In still other terms (this being a bit complicated to explain), put each
stone so as to cover as many joints as possible, being sure each covers
some north/south joints and some east/west joints.

So now we have a 2-by-3-foot wall with ends and a comer. How about a
larger wall? It is more of the same with a few exceptions. First, going
much over 3 feet in height, you should increase the base or overall
width by some 8 inches for each added foot of height. For example, a
7-foot-high wall needs a 4-feet-8-inch-wide base. For a 10-foot height,
the base should be 7 feet wide. Width can remain at the base dimension
right to the top or can taper (to a point, if you like).

The higher the wall, the deeper should be your footings. For any wall
much over waist high (a major undertaking that presupposes an ample
supply of stones), you should go down to below frost level or a depth of
2 feet, whichever is deeper. This is a lot of work lost to the eye
forever, but it guarantees a good wall.

*Editor's note: John Vivian's book* Building Stone Walls *expands on
this subject and discusses how to quarry rock and build stairs, stiles,
gates, and retaining walls.*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-0)

PHOTO: CLYDE H. SMITH

Building stone walls is gratifying, and the product will last into
future generations.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-1)

 

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

A plumb line gets you started with even courses when building on uneven
ground (dashed line shows ground level).
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-2)

 

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Where to find your stones.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-3)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tools for wall building.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-4)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

More tools for wall building.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-5)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

An example of a good stone wall and one with adjecent joints called
"runs."
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-6.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-6)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tie stones literally keep a wall tied together from front to back.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-7.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-7)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tie stones are especially important at corners. They are shown here
shaded.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-8.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-8)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tie stones are shown here overlapping in the courses.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71394-9.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix022.html#a71394-9)

CLYDE H. SMITH

Come fire, hail or high water, a properly built stone wall will be there
for your great-grandkids to remember you by.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter026.html}

::: body
# [The Perfect Apple Pie](#toc.html#chap-26) {.chapter-title}

**Making the perfect apple pie is all about having a perfect apple pie
recipe, and this article contains some of the best, including recipes
for pie crust, Dutch apple pie, cider apple pie, sugar-free apple pie
and other varieties.**

**Mary Karenou**

**October/November 1991**

The perfect apple pie recipe is elusive, but you'd be hard-pressed to
find a more popular fall dessert. You'd probably be hard-pressed to find
a more popular dessert any time of the year. But as the leaves fall and
the air cools, a harvest of apples can only signal one thing - pie
season. While apple pies grace dinner tables (as well as lunch boxes,
late-night snack runs, stolen bites at breakfast, you name it) and
restaurant menus year-round these days, there is something magical about
a slice of ovenwarm apple pie on a crisp fall night: steam wafting from
a vented top, fragrant cinnamon and sugar harmonizing with the sliced
apples to produce a delightful crustbusting ooze and vanilla ice cream
or cheddar melting with the whole business like a lovestruck teenager at
the high school homecoming dance.

For as many opportunities as there are to eat apple pie, there are an
equal number of variations. The school of thought on apple pie recipes
ranges from the puristic (a vented double crust, a little lemon juice, a
touch of sugar for taste, and perhaps an egg or a bit of flour to keep
the mess together) to the blasphemous (the land of crisps, crackles, and
crumbs). Once you've sorted through that, there are the debates over
sliced vs. chunked, precooked vs. raw, peeled vs. unpeeled, single crust
vs. double crust, baking quickly at one high temperature vs. lowering to
a moderate oven...well, you get the idea.

The quest for the "perfect" apple pie recipe is a subject of lengthy and
heady debate, a matter I certainly wouldn't presume to settle (I was
once told never to enter into any argument that involves someone's
mother). However, within all the shades of gray, there are some
fail-safe truths to baking a perfect apple pie.

**Use an apple that will hold its shape.** Be sure that your apple is
firm enough to withstand cooking. Applesauce is a lovely confection,
just as long as it's not wrapped in your pastry.

**Check the pie every few minutes or so toward the end of baking.**
Crusts and toppings can burn quickly. Ten minutes of forgetfulness will
leave your effort faintly resembling a pile of charcoal briquettes.

**Start with a fresh crust.** It should be simple: just flour, butter,
water, sugar, salt. Yet, whether due to time constraints or timidity,
many people are turning to frozen crusts. A good number of these, in all
fairness, prove to be quite passable. But even if your fellow pie-eaters
don't know you cheated, you'll know. While the capacity for creating
something suspiciously close to a lead pancake certainly exists, the
benefits of learning once and for all how to make pastry are numerous
(it tastes better, costs pennies, and you don't feel like you just
lip-synched the national anthem).

**Be willing to experiment**. Nobody gets everything right the first
time; don't expect your pie recipe to be any different. Adjust the oven
temperature if the pastry is soggy, add a little more flour if the
mixture is too runny, mix in some lemon juice if the apples aren't tart
enough, cut back on the cinnamon or sugar if too heady or sweet (there
can be too much of a good thing), etc.

Seeing as I am not brave enough to choose a "perfect" apple pie - or
vain enough to publish my own favorite (my mother's Dutch apple, I must
confess) - I am very grateful that Stark Bro's Nurseries (located in the
town of Louisiana, Missouri) set upon this awesome task in their contest
to find the perfect fruit pie. The apple pie recipes below are a
sampling from among the contest's 100 award-winning recipes, collected
in the book "Perfect Fruit Pies."

### Awesome Apple Pie {.level3}

Yield: 8 servings\
**Crust:**\
*1 ¾ cups all-purpose flour\
1 tablespoon sugar\
½ cup chilled, unsalted butter\
1 egg yolk\
2 tablespoons ice water*

**Filling:**

*1 ½ pounds Granny Smith apples\
Sugar\
3 tablespoons melted butter\
4 fresh apricots\
4 tablespoons apricot jam\
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice, or 2 tablespoons Cointreau liqueur*

For crust, place flour and sugar in a mixing bowl. With two knives, cut
in butter until crumbly. Mix egg yolk and ice water together and
gradually add to flour mixture. Form into a ball. Wrap in plastic wrap
and chill for 1 hour.

Preheat oven to 400°F. Butter an 11- or 12-inch pie dish with removable
bottom. On a floured surface, roll out dough to 3/16 thickness, just to
fit the pie dish. Prick with a fork. Line pan with aluminum foil and
fill with dry beans. Bake for 15 minutes. Remove foil and beans and bake
about 10 minutes more or until slightly browned. Cool.

Reduce heat to 320°F Peel, core, and slice apples. Roll each slice in
sugar and cook in melted butter until sugar has caramelized and is light
brown. Repeat until all apples have been coated and cooked.

Slice apricots and cook the same way as apples. Place on a plate to
cool. Arrange fruit in concentric circles in pie crust until covered and
all fruit is used. Heat apricot jam in a saucepan. Add lemon juice or
Cointreau and spoon over fruit in pie crust. Bake for 15 minutes. Serve
warm or at room temperature with fresh whipped cream.

*-Felicity Gatchell\
Birmingham, Alabama*

### Richard's Apple-Blackberry Pie {.level3}

Yield: 6 servings\
*Pastry for two 9-inch pie crusts\
3 tablespoons melted butter (no margarine)\
5 cups peeled and sliced Jonathan or Granny Smith apples\
2 cups blackberries\
½ cup granulated sugar\
¼ cup brown sugar\
4 tablespoons all-purpose flour\
2 teaspoons freshly squeezed lime juice\
Milk*

Preheat oven to 350°F. Prepare and roll out pastry. Line a 9-inch pan
with pastry.

In a bowl, blend butter and all other ingredients except milk. Mix
gently. Pour mixture into pie crust. Cover with second pie crust that
has been vented with a fork. Bake for 20 minutes. Brush top with milk.
Increase heat to 375°F and bake for 20 minutes more, or until crust is
golden brown.

*-Richard E. Cheli\
Owensboro, Kentucky*

### Dutch Apple Pie {.level3}

Yield: 6 servings\
**Crumbs:**\
*2 cups all-purpose flour\
1 cup brown sugar\
½ cup quick oats\
1 teaspoon salt\
¾ cup melted butter\
***Filling:**\
*1* ¼*cups water\
2/3 cup granulated sugar\
3 tablespoons cornstarch\
¼ teaspoon salt\
1 teaspoon vanilla extract\
2 cups diced apples*

Preheat oven to 350°F. For crumbs, mix together all crumb ingredients.
Reserve 1 cup crumbs for topping. Pat remaining crumbs into a 9-inch pie
pan for the crust.

For filling, bring water and granulated sugar to a boil. Slowly add
cornstarch, salt and vanilla. Cook for 1 minute. When thick, remove from
heat and add apples. Pour into crust and top with reserved crumbs. Bake
for 40 to 45 minutes, or until crust is nicely browned. (A 9-inch,
unbaked pie shell can also be used instead of the crumb mixture.)

*-Erma Yutzy\
Drakesville, Idaho*

### The Best Apple Pie Ever {.level3}

Yield: 8 servings\
**Crust:**\
*1 ½ cups all-purpose flour\
¼ cup granulated sugar\
½ teaspoon salt\
1 teaspoon cinnamon\
½ cup plus 2 tablespoons butter or margarine\
¼ cup cider or apple juice*

**Filling:\
** *8 McIntosh apples, peeled, cored, and sliced\
1 2/3 cups sour cream\
1/3 cup all-purpose flour\
½ teaspoon salt\
1 egg, slightly beaten\
2 teaspoons vanilla extract*

**Topping:**\
*1 cup chopped walnuts\
½ cup all-purpose flour\
1/3 cup brown sugar\
½ cup butter or margarine, at room temperature\
1/3 cup granulated sugar\
1 tablespoon cinnamon*

Preheat oven to 450°F. For pie crust, mix all dry ingredients together
and cut in butter until crumbly. Add cider and mix until moistened. Roll
dough to fit a 10-inch quiche pan, keeping sides high.

For filling, mix all filling ingredients together. Pour into pie crust.
Put aluminum foil on edge of crust so it will not burn. Bake for 10
minutes. Reduce heat to 350°F and continue baking for 40 minutes more.

For topping, mix all topping ingredients together and sprinkle over top
of pie. Bake for 15 minutes at 350°F.

*-Kay Crockett\
Springdale, Ohio*

### Cider Apple Pie {.level3}

Yield: 8 servings\
*Pastry for one 9-inch pie crust\
4 to 5 baking apples\
1 tablespoon lemon juice\
½ cup sugar\
3 eggs\
1 cup heavy cream\
¼ cup apple cider\
¼ teaspoon nutmeg\
2 tablespoons sugar*

Preheat oven to 400°F. Prepare pie crusts and flute edges.

Peel, quarter, core and cut apples into 1/16-inch slices. Toss apple
slices with lemon juice and ½ cup sugar in a large bowl. Arrange,
rounded side down, starting at the outside edge of the pie crust, in two
circles in bottom of crust.

Bake at 400°F for 10 minutes. Reduce heat to 350°F, and continue baking
for 20 minutes.

Beat eggs slightly in a medium-size bowl. Stir in cream, apple cider and
nutmeg. Pour over apples. Continue baking for 15 minutes more. Sprinkle
with 2 tablespoons sugar. Bake for 15 more, or until top is golden. Cool
for two hours before cutting.

*-Michaela Walsh\
Auburn, Washington*

### Dutch Apple-Raspberry Pie {.level3}

Yield: 6 servings\
*1 egg yolk\
1 graham cracker pie crust\
*

**Filling:**\
*4 to 5 cups thinly sliced Cortland apples\
½ cup granulated sugar\
2 teaspoons cinnamon\
1 teaspoon lemon juice (optional)\
¼ teaspoon nutmeg (optional)\
2 tablespoons butter\
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour\
1 to 1 ½ cups fresh, red raspberries\
Butter*

**Topping:**

*½ cup all-purpose flour\
¼ cup rolled oats\
1 cup firmly packed brown sugar\
1 teaspoon cinnamon\
½ cup butter\
¼ teaspoon salt*

Preheat oven to 400°F*.* Brush egg yolk onto pie crust and bake for 5
minutes. Remove from oven and reduce heat to 350°F*.*

For filling, in a large mixing bowl combine apples, ½ cup granulated
sugar, cinnamon, lemon juice, nutmeg, butter and 2 tablespoons flour.
Toss gently until mixed. Add raspberries and toss gently. Fill pie crust
with apple mixture. Dot with butter.

For topping, in a small bowl, mix ½ cup flour, oats, brown sugar,
cinnamon, ½ cup butter and salt with a fork. Spread over apple mixture
and bake for 30 to 40 minutes, or until apples are tender and topping is
browned. Remove from oven and cool. Center will drop after cooling.

*-Linda S. Ochs\
Waterloo, New York*

### Sugar-Free Apple Pie {.level3}

Apple juice may be used as a sweetener in fruit pies other than apple,
with little effect on the predominant fruit's flavor. If it's important
that you use absolutely no sugar, check the label on the concentrate to
be sure sugar isn't listed as an ingredient; some concentrates labeled
"natural" do contain sugar.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings\
*2 2/3 cups all-purpose flour\
2 sticks butter or margarine, at room temperature\
5 tablespoons ice water\
12 medium red apples\
4 ounces frozen, unsweetened applejuice concentrate, undiluted\
2 to 3 tablespoons cornstarch\
1 teaspoon nutmeg\
2 tablespoons melted butter or margarine\
Heavy cream*

Preheat oven to 375°F. For crust, mix flour and margarine. Add ice
water. Mix until dough forms. Do not overmix. Place in freezer for 10
minutes. Roll out for a two-crust pie. (This can be made in two halves
for ease.)

For filling, peel and slice apples. Use more or less apples if desired.
Mix frozen apple-juice concentrate, cornstarch, and nutmeg with apples
and place mixture in bottom crust. Spread half the melted butter or
margarine over apples. Cover with top crust and seal; spread remaining
butter or margarine on the crust. Bake for 50 minutes or until bubbly,
plus 5 minutes. Top with homemade, unsweetened whipped cream.

*-K. M. Westbrook\
Webberville, Michigan*

### My Perfect Apple Pie {.level3}

Yield: 6 servings\
*1 tablespoon lemon juice (optional)\
1 cup sugar\
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour\
1 teaspoon cinnamon\
1/8 teaspoon nutmeg\
1/8 teaspoon salt\
6 to 8 tart apples, peeled, cored, and thinly sliced (approximately 6
cups)\
Pastry for two 9-inch, deep-dish pie crusts\
2 tablespoons butter\
Sugar*

Preheat oven to 400°F. If apples lack tartness, sprinkle with 1
tablespoon lemon juice. Combine sugar, flour, cinnamon, nutmeg, and
salt. Mix with apples. Line a 9-inch pie pan with pastry. Fill with
apple mixture and dot with butter. Put on top crust, cutting slits for
steam to escape. Seal edges. Sprinkle with sugar. Bake for 50 minutes.
Serve warm or cool.\
*-George N. Melson\
Mexico, Missouri*

### "Delicious" Apple Pie {.level3}

Yield: 6 servings\
*¼ cup all-purpose flour\
¼ cup sugar (more, if apples are tart)\
½ teaspoon cinnamon\
¼ teaspoon allspice\
¼ teaspoon nutmeg\
1 9-inch pie shell, unbaked\
4 to 5 medium-size Golden Delicious apples\
2 tablespoons low-calorie margarine\
¼ cup warm water\
Cinnamon*

Preheat oven to 350°F. Mix flour, sugar, cinnamon, allspice and nutmeg.
Place flour mixture into pie shell. Dot apples with margarine. Pour warm
water over apples. Sprinkle with small amounts of cinnamon. Cover with a
lid or aluminum foil and bake for about 45 minutes.

Remove foil or lid approximately 15 minutes before pie is done. There is
no top crust.

*-Frances Shannon Shaw\
Alexandria, Louisiana*

## Perfect Pie Crust {.level2}

With crust, there are two elements that make all the difference: the
ingredients you use and the temperature of the ingredients as you work
with them.

**Flour.** Unbleached white flour will give the best results, but if you
plan to refrigerate unbleached flour dough for a few days before baking,
it will turn gray. (Freezing the dough, on the other hand, will not turn
it gray.) So, if you wish to use half the dough now and half later on,
use all-purpose white flour. Whole-wheat flour, used alone, makes an
acceptable, if heavy, crust; you can, if you wish, substitute it for no
more than a quarter of the white flour called for in a recipe.
Whole-wheat flour can usually be found at any health-food store or food
co-op

**Fats.** The choices here are butter, margarine, vegetable shortening
and lard; some cooks use oil, though I don't recommend it. The old
standbys are butter and lard, used together in various proportions. This
makes a crust that is delicious but not exactly what the doctor ordered
for anyone concerned with cholesterol levels. An all-margarine crust is
possible, though it's important to keep the margarine very cold (in
fact, you may even wish to start out with it frozen). A good combination
is 5 parts cold butter or frozen margarine to 1 part lard or vegetable
shortening

**Liquids.** Ice water is the usual choice, but any thin, cold liquid
can be used. Orange juice, for instance, used half-and-half with water,
makes a lovely crust for certain pies. When assembling the ingredients
for your crust, put whatever liquid you're using in a measuring cup,
along with a few ice cubes. By the time you want to add the liquid, it
will be thoroughly cold. It is impossible to say what the "right amount"
of liquid will be, since different flours absorb different amounts of
liquid; in addition, the same kind of flour may need more liquid on dry
days or less when the humidity is high. If you use too much liquid,
you're apt to have a tough crust; too little, and you'll have a crust
that falls apart and is difficult to work with. Don't be frightened by
these dire warnings, though. The key is to add the liquid slowly and
stop when you've added just enough to make the dough hold together
nicely.

**Salt, sugar, other seasonings?** Use salt if you wish, but it's really
unnecessary. Many cooks add sugar - a tablespoon or so - to the crust
for any fruit pie; others wouldn't dream of doing so. Make your own
choice. Other additions are possible. A little grated citrus peel, for
instance, can be pleasant, and on occasion you might want to add a few
pinches of nutmeg or cinnamon. It's up to you!

**Temperature.** The importance of using cold - or even frozen -
margarine and of thoroughly chilling whichever liquid you use bears
repeating. This is because it's vitally important to keep the fat you're
using from becoming soft (or even, heaven forbid, melting) before the
crust goes into the oven. This is the true, greatest secret of' a flaky
crust - the ingredients must be cold, and the crust must be kept chilled
as much of the time as possible until it is baked. The alternative is a
soggy, heavy crust, which you won't want to acknowledge was made by you.
For this reason, it's important to use cold butter (or other fat) and
ice water. Also, if you are making the crust in a hot kitchen, or find
it necessary to work on the crust for even a few minutes, pop the dough
into your refrigerator until it's cold and firm.

**Method.** Until fairly recently, all pie-crust dough was made by hand,
usually by cutting fat into the flour with a pastry blender or a knife
held in each hand. People able to work very quickly with their hands
even use their fingertips to combine the fat and the flour. Using this
method, the fat is cut into the mixture until it resembles coarse
cornmeal; then the liquid is quickly stirred in. Many people still do
this, but most of those who have used a food processor are convinced
that it makes the best crust, since the whole process is accomplished so
quickly that the dough doesn't have a chance to warm up. The
instructions below call for the use of a food processor, but the crust
can also be made by hand.

**Pie pan.** Experts agree that pies made in glass or black steel pie
pans have the best crisp, evenly browned crusts. The worst choice,
contrary to what many people think, is a shiny metal pie pan. Most cooks
also grease the inside of the pie pan or spray it with a nonstick
vegetable coating

**Rolling out the dough.** The two main things to remember when you're
rolling out flaky pastry dough are not to kill the dough by overworking
it and to keep it cold at all times. Any sort of rolling pin or other
cylindrical shape will do - even a wine or soda bottle in a pinch - but
the very best and easiest results come from a fairly large, heavy
rolling pin. (You can occasionally find a hollow rolling pin that can be
filled with ice water.) The idea is to have the pin do the work, not
you. Roll the dough on a lightly floured surface (a bread board, a
kitchen counter, a pastry cloth, or especially, a slab of marble, which
will stay cool). Somr bread boards and pastry cloths come with circles
of various sizes printed on them; this can be quite a help. If the dough
is very cold and you find it hard to work with, bang it a few times with
the rolling pin.

Begin to roll the dough into a circle that is 2 inches larger than your
pie pan, rolling from the center outward and not rolling over the edge
of the dough. Turning the dough from time to time helps in this process.
You may have to sprinkle a little more flour on both the rolling surface
and the pin. When you have your circle of dough (and it can be a fairly
rough circle), roll it up on your lightly floured rolling pin and unroll
it over the pie pan.

Now ease the dough down into the pan by lifting the edges. Push it down
a little around the sides, which you want to be a little thicker than
the bottom. Cut off the excess dough - the best way to do this is to run
your rolling pin over the top. Next, push the dough up so that it's
uniformly about 1/8 inch above the pie pan.

**For a single-crust pie.** Do some fluting and/or crimping to make the
edge look attractive and to help it adhere to the rim of the pan. This
can be done with the back of a fork, or by pinching the dough with two
fingers of one hand and bringing a finger or knuckle of the other hand
between them.

**For a double-crust pie.** Don't do anything fancy to the edge quite
yet. First, put in your filling, then bring out your second little cake
of dough. Roll it, drape it around the rolling pin, and unroll it over
the filling. Now trim the edges evenly and crimp or flute them together.
Cut slits or decorative shapes in the top crust to let steam escape.

### Basic Pie Crust {.level3}

Yield: 1 double crust or 2 shells for 9-inch pie\
*1 ¾ cup flour*\
*1 tablespoon sugar (optional)*\
*1 teaspoon salt (optional)\
¼ sticks cold butter or frozen margarine*\
*2 tablespoons chilled margarine, vegetable shortening, or lard*\
*3 tablespoons ice water in a measuring cup up with ice cubes*

Put the flour (and the salt and sugar, if you're using them) into a food
processor fitted with the metal blade. Cut both types of fat into ½-inch
pieces and drop into the processor. Process for about 3 seconds, until
the flour and fat are barely combined Remove the ice cubes and pour the
ice water into processor. Process again for 2 or 3 seconds - just until
the dough forms a cohesive mass. If the dough doesn't hold together, add
a few more drops of very cold water and process briefly again.

Cut the dough in half, shape each half into a flat little cake, wrap
well in aluminum foil or plastic wrap and chill for 1 to 2 hours, or
until fully firm. (The dough will keep for a week refrigerated and much
longer if frozen.)

*Editor 's note: Mary Karenou grew up in Michigan, where she authored
her own family cookbook and cooked professionally for several years
before moving to Ohio. She is also the author of "Perfect Fruit Pies."*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71396-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix023.html#a71396-0)

PHOTO: STEVEN MARK NEEDHAM/ENVISION

As many opportunities as there are to eat apple pie, there are an equal
number of variations. Here, for instance, Dutch Apple Pie.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71396-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix023.html#a71396-1)

STARK BRO'S NURSERIES, MO.

These pies are beautiful and delicious too!
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71396-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix023.html#a71396-2)

JAMES VILES/SUPERSTOCK

The perfect pie crust is simple with only a handful of ingredients.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter027.html}

::: body
# [How To Tell A Story Well](#toc.html#chap-27) {.chapter-title}

**Tips on storytelling and how to become a good storyteller.**

**By Robin Moore**

**October/November 1991**

I make my living by knowing how to tell a story well and am an author of
books celebrating the oral tradition. The questions I'm most often asked
are: "How did you get started in storytelling?" and "Who taught you how
to tell a story?"

I have never been able to come up with satisfactory answers to these
questions basically because I didn't "learn" to tell a story any more
than I "learned" how to crawl or walk or run. But I did have a lot of
examples of good storytelling techniques around me while I was growing
up in rural Pennsylvania during the 1950s. My family, neighbors and
friends were always telling stories. Of course they didn't call it that.
To them it was just talk. From this "talk" I developed an active
imagination and a love of language. I guess you could say they gave me
the gift of gab.

I realize that not everyone was as fortunate as I was. I have been
astonished to find that there are a lot of people who grew up without
stories or storytelling. But whether you have storytelling in your
background or not, I think just about anyone can be a good storyteller.

Here are a few simple tips on storytelling that will help you create and
tell a story. I'll use "The Cherry Tree Buck" as an example. I first
read this story in a book, but you can develop any story that interests
you, regardless of its source. It's easier to start with stories from
books or other people; then, once you have the hang of it, you can
develop stories from your own imagination or personal memory.

**Step one.** The story lives in pictures, not words. You may have
noticed that while you were reading the cherry story, you not only read
the words but saw pictures in your imagination. It was almost as if you
had a movie screen in your mind and you were watching the events unfold
on the screen. This is *storylistening.*

To be a story*teller,* you have to convert the story into images. To do
this, I simply close my eyes and "daydream" my way through the story. As
I do, my mind is making a movie of the story, which I can later draw on
in telling my tale. When you have completed your "movie," place it in
memory and open your eyes.

**Step two.** Now that you have the images of a story in your mind, you
can tell it. When you tell a story, look two places at once: Look at
your listeners, making eye contact with them as you do when you talk to
someone. But also look onto the imaginary movie screen in your head and
roll the film you've made. Now, simply describe to listeners what you're
seeing!

Incidentally, when the listener hears the story, their "movie camera"
clicks on, and they begin to see similar images in their minds. This is
the magic of storytelling - using words, gestures, and facial
expressions, you can transmit an image from your mind to the listener's.
One of the great things about this technique is that you don't need to
worry about rehearsal, memorization, or dramatics. You simply describe
what you see as you are seeing it. That means you don't have to worry
about forgetting the words. There are no words - only pictures.

Here are a few storytelling tips to help you in telling your stories
compellingly:

**Keep it simple.** You don't need to describe everything in infinite
detail. That would leave nothing for the listener to do. The art of
storytelling is not so much about what you include as it is about what
you leave out. Leave some things up to the listener's imagination; let
him fill in the blanks. Better to tell a simple tale well than a complex
tale poorly.

**Don't rush through it.** Slow down. Most stories improve by telling
them at about half speed. Storytelling is a spoken art, so remember that
both the ear and the mouth need time to savor the words. While there are
some parts of stories that call for a quicker pace, use this
fast-forward speech sparingly. If you start out at 90 miles an hour,
where can you go from there?

Slowing down also lets silence come into your tale. Silence is to the
storyteller as the darkness of the night sky is to a fireworks expert.
If there were no darkness, the fireworks would not be nearly as
spectacular.

**Develop your own style.** We all have a certain style of doing things.
As in life, there are no rules about the style in which you tell a
story. What works, works. Listen to other storytellers and emulate what
you admire in their style in order to develop your own.

*Editor 's note: If you'd like to learn more about the revival of the
ancient art of storytelling, write the National Storytelling Network (P
0. Box 795, Jonesboro, TN 37659; tel: 800-525-4514).*

***THE CHERRY TREE BUCK***

Now, I know you've all seen those old flintlock rifles. My grandfather
had one that he had gotten from his father and, undoubtably, he had
received it from his father. One day he took me deer hunting with that
old-fashioned rifle.

We got all the way up in the woods when we realized that something
pretty crucial had been forgotten. We had the rifle and the gunpowder,
but the bullets had been left behind. So there we were, sitting pretty
stupid.

Now, fortunately, my grandmother had packed us some cherries for lunch,
and we were eating those cherries and sitting underneath the tree,
trying to figure out what to do. I spit out a cherry pit and said to my
grandfather, "Could we use these for bullets?"

He said, "I like that kind of thinking." And he took one of the pits and
dropped it down the barrel of the gun, took a ramrod and shoved it down
there. We sat real quiet and, sure enough, in a few minutes, a great big
buck came walking out of the woods.

Now, I know you know that in those days a lot of people wouldn't have
any meat on the table if it weren't for the white-tailed deer. And we
waited and we watched and that deer came walking down the trail toward
us.

And my grandfather raised that old fashioned rifle and he sighted it on
that deer's chest. He held his breath, pulled the trigger...and the shot
went off just fine.

When the smoke cleared, I looked and saw that the deer was still
standing there as if it wasn't even hurt. He was just shaking his head
back and forth.

I could see that the hair in between his antlers was roughed up a little
bit and I realized what had happened. My grandfather probably shot a
little high and that cherry pit must have flown through the air and
lodged itself in the skin between the deer's antlers. Now that's pretty
strange. After a moment, the deer came to his senses and ran off.

We kind of forgot about it, and then the next year we were out wandering
around in that part of the woods. I know you've all seen cherry blossoms
in the spring and can recognize those white blossoms a mile off. We
looked up through the woods - the leaves were just coming on the trees -
and we saw this cherry tree walking down the trail toward us!

And when we looked, sure enough, there he was. It was that deer with a
little tiny cherry tree growing out of the top of his head. We followed
the deer around for awhile in amazement and put the pieces together. The
seed must have managed to find enough food to grow there on the deer's
head, and later on in the season he got a beautiful crop of hair that
had little red cherries in it.

We could actually collect those cherries by following the deer through
the woods. 'Cause you know, every now and then, the branches would sweep
those cherries off and we'd pick them up. Every year, we just loved to
watch the cherry tree deer through all the seasons. And you know what?
My grandfather decided we were going to protect that deer because, even
in central Pennsylvania, we very rarely get a deer with a cherry tree
growing out of the top of his head.

So we put signs all around the land. We didn't want the hunters to come
near the cherry tree buck's stomping ground, and the hunters respected
my grandfather enough to obey.

The years passed, and that deer grew up just fine. The cherry tree grew
just as well and came to be about five feet tall. What's more, you could
get about a bushel of cherries off the head of that deer every season,
should you be inclined to follow him around for some time.

And then one year, late in the fall and during the hunting season, we
were walking around in the cornfield and I heard a sound up in the
woods. It sounded like a modern rifle. We ran up there and discovered
that a hunter had trespassed on our land. I don't know where he came
from, but he was standing on the edge of the cornfield, looking down at
something at his feet. When we ran closer, we could see that it was the
cherry tree buck that he had killed.

I never saw my grandfather lose his temper like he did that day. He
grabbed that man by the scruff of his neck and the seat of his pants and
dragged him off our land. When he came back, we examined the deer.

We could see he was dead. Now, normally in a case like that, we would
have taken the deer's skin and made something out of it: moccasins or
bags. We would have taken the meat and given it to my grandmother, and
she would have cooked it for us. We would have used a lot of other parts
of the deer, but we didn't do that this time.

Instead, my grandfather went and got two shovels and we dug a hole there
in the cornfield and we buried the deer right there with his legs folded
under, his nose facing east and his cherry tree sticking out of the
ground.

And sure enough, that next spring the tree grew just fine right there,
right over the deer's grave. We got a beautiful crop of cherries that
year. I can remember walking out there when they were just coming into
red. I walked out, reached up to select one of the cherries, put it in
my mouth and - ow!!! There was something hard in my mouth! A little twig
or something.

I picked another one and owww!! Another little twiggy thing. And then I
looked and I could see every one of those little individual cherries had
a little set of deer antlers in them.

And they were perfectly good cherries. The only problem was, by the time
you had de-pitted and de-antlered all those cherries, it would take you
a whole afternoon to get enough to make a pie. But as far as I know,
that cherry tree is still growing there, and I hope it grows there a
long, long time.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71398-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix024.html#a71398-0)

ILLUSTRATION: JIM DEIGAN

The Cherry Tree Buck grew a cherry tree from between its antlers.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71398-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix024.html#a71398-1)

JIM DEIGAN

The cherries from the tree had small sets of antlers inside.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter028.html}

::: body
# [Fall Mulching](#toc.html#chap-28) {.chapter-title}

**The ins and outs of fall mulching including covering the fall crops,
soil moisture retention, weed suppression, soil temperature and what to
mulch.**

**By Stu Campbell**

**October/November 1991**

Fall mulching has many benefits not the least of which, as far as I'm
concerned, is that you can walk around in your garden on rainy days and
not have three inches of sticky mud on the soles of your shoes when you
come back inside.

But besides acting as an organic StainMaster, applying mulch in the fall
(and mulching anytime, really) reduces water loss in soil, suppresses
weed growth, and protects plants from temperature extremes - the final
warm October days and first wintry November nights.

**Soil Moisture Retention**

Mulch's ability to conserve soil moisture has long been documented. It
may be its most universally recognized virtue. While authorities and
test results differ, it is clear that moisture evaporation from soil
covered with mulch is reduced anywhere from 10 to 50 percent. Whichever
you accept, the water-conserving value of mulching can't be
overemphasized, especially in these times of water restrictions and
shortages.

Applying mulch keeps the soil from drying out partly because it prevents
dew and water drawn up from the subsoil from escaping. Contrary to what
a lot of people believe, dew is not simply condensation of water from
the atmosphere. It is also condensation of moisture from the air pockets
found in the soil. Most dew is completely wasted, as far as plant growth
is concerned, unless there is something on the surface to catch it and
prevent it from evaporating.

**Weed Suppression**

As for weed control, one study has found weeding time to be reduced by
almost two-thirds through the use of mulches. Proper mulching can
practically eliminate the need for weeding and cultivating.

There are a few catches, however. First, the mulch itself must be
weed-free. Many a gardener has had the best mulching intentions go
astray with one application of weed-strewn hay or manure. They end up
introducing more weeds to their garden than they controlled.

Second, a mulch must be deep enough to prevent existing weed seeds from
germinating. As with most other seeds, weeds need light to germinate.
Those weeds trying to come up under a mulch sprout in darkness and
wither away. If a mulch is applied too thinly or unevenly, weeds may
still find their way through. So when applying your mulch, you'll want
to think like a weed and cover all the open areas.

Finally, mulches won't smother all weeds. Some particularly tough weeds
have the fortitude to push themselves up through just about any mulch.
These should be easy to spot, however, and even more easily plucked when
growing in a mulched bed.

**Soil Temperature**

The effect mulching has on soil temperatures is probably one of the most
often overlooked benefits. Many of us are more concerned with
aboveground temperatures and don't spend much time pondering what's
happening underground. Simply stated: Mulch is insulation. It keeps the
soil around your plants' roots cooler on warm days and warmer on cold
nights. This is especially important during rapid temperature shifts.

In cold weather, mulch works to prevent the soil from alternately
freezing and thawing, which leads to soil heaving and root damage. This
doesn't mean the soil won't freeze; it just won't happen overnight. It's
those rapid changes that not only threaten aboveground growth, but may
also send tender plant roots into shock. Winter mulches are usually
applied in the fall after the plants are dormant and are removed the
following spring.

### What to Mulch {.level3}

You'll want to mulch anything that needs protection from moisture loss,
temperature change, or weed infestation. In the fall, though, more often
than not that means rhododendrons, azaleas, roses, bulbs and annuals. I
say "more often than not" because, with seasons and climates varying so
much throughout the country, a blanket statement would be inaccurate.
That said, here is my advice.

**Rhododendrons and azaleas.** As far as these are concerned, unmulched
plants, or those with an insufficient amount of mulch, may suffer from
chlorosis (yellow or blanched leaves), weak or underdeveloped leaves, or
even death. These plants cannot tolerate hot, dry soil. Their feeding
roots are severely injured under such conditions, and the plant has
trouble putting out healthy leaves, never mind spectacular blooms.
Applying mulch can help cool the roots and hold moisture.

In addition, since these are mostly evergreen plants, which carry their
leaves all winter, they are continually losing water to the air. If
there is an inadequate amount of soil moisture, the plant will lose
water faster than it can replace it. The end result will be brown,
scorched foliage, which in extreme cases may just give up the ghost and
drop off. By watering the ground well and mulching in the fall, you can
insulate the soil from sudden temperature changes and ensure that
rhododendrons have an ample moisture supply.

Rhododendrons and azaleas both prefer slightly acid soils, and your
mulch selection can play a part. I suggest you choose an organic mulch,
like leaves or pine needles. A dry-leaf mulch (especially oak leaves),
spread 10 to 12 inches deep, can be laid down at planting (these will
decompose quickly to give you a 3- or 4-inch layer). A 2- or 3-inch
layer of pine needles will also do the trick. Wood chips or sawdust - if
they are weathered - or peat moss can be substituted for pine needles.

If you are using one of these mulches and watering your rhododendrons
following a fertilizer schedule but still have an unhealthy-looking
plant, there must be something else going on. Maybe you have an insect
or disease problem or grew the wrong variety for your part of the
country. But let's not blame the mulch. It has a bad enough rap as it
is.

**Roses.** Just about everyone who grows roses agrees that putting down
a layer of mulch after the ground has started to cool is necessary to
protect plants from temperature extremes and heaving. What they don't
agree on is how to do it. Mulching roses in the fall is fairly simple if
you remember why you're doing it. Most roses are amazingly hardy, so the
mulch isn't meant to keep them from freezing. The goal is to maintain
constant temperature and avoid repeated freezing and thawing.

There are hundreds of methods and materials for preparing roses for
winter - almost as many as there are rose growers. Probably the most
accepted is to mound about 10 to 12 inches of mulch around the base of
the rosebush. This should not be done until after the first hard frost.
If done too early, the roses may be fooled into a late growth spurt,
which will delay dormancy and lead to more winter injury, not less.

What you decide to do from this point is open to all kinds of
possibilities. In areas where the temperature stays well below freezing
for most of the season, you will want to provide some additional
protection. Some lean toward the Styrofoam "rose cones" that fit around
the mounds; others prefer ground corncobs, sawdust, or chopped leaves.

The rose cones work well when used in conjunction with mounded soil.
They can overheat during those sunny January thaws, so it's a good idea
to poke a ventilation hole in the top. Another suggestion is to weight
the cone down with a stone or something similar; otherwise your rose
cones may end up in the neighbor's yard.

Wire cages filled with leaves or compost are often used in lieu of the
Styrofoam cones. These cages needn't be stuffed to the gills with
leaves. That makes for poor air circulation and may lead to disease
problems.

Whichever system you select, water the soil well before covering your
roses, and remove the mulch in the spring before new growth begins. If
the mulch is left on until buds start swelling, it may put the new
growth into shock when you remove it.

**Bulbs.** Certainly, mulching bulbs is not essential. But here in the
great Northeast, the insulating value of a nice, thick organic mulch
can't be overlooked. In Vermont, spring-flowering bulbs like tulips and
daffodils are planted in late September or early October. The bulbs need
time to develop their roots before the ground freezes and they lapse
into winter dormancy. To postpone their long winter's nap, I protect
them with a layer of rotted manure, leaves, or compost.

Wood chips, corncobs, sawdust - just about any mulch - will inhibit the
emergence of your bulbs. If they can push up through a wet spring soil
or several inches of snow, I doubt a couple of inches of mulch will slow
them down.

**Annuals.** Mulch your annual beds early before the first frost has
settled into the soil - so that earthworms and beneficial microorganisms
can stay at work longer during the cold months.

Wait, you say, is that everything I have to mulch to prepare for cold
weather? Yes and no. Yes, this is a good place to start, but you know
through your own experience what your season is like, so act
accordingly. And no, there's more to mulch after the ground has cooled.
In the next article, [Winter
Mulching](http://www.motherearthnews.com/nature-community/winter-mulching.aspx),
I'll discuss mulching of delicate and hardy vegetables, fruits and woody
plants.

*Editor's note: Stu Campbell is the author of* The Mulch Book: A
Complete Guide for Gardeners, *from which this article is adapted.*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71400-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix025.html#a71400-0)

PHOTO: DAVID CAVAGNARO

Sandy Langhorst, of Santa Rosa, California, prepares her autumn garden
with a dried-leaf mulch.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71400-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix025.html#a71400-1)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71400-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix025.html#a71400-2)
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71400-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix025.html#a71400-3)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter029.html}

::: body
# [Log Home Insulation Saves Energy](#toc.html#chap-29) {.chapter-title}

**Keep your log cabin warm and energy efficient with these tips on
chinking, peeled logs, roofs and adding insulation.**

**By Harry Yost**

**October/November 1991**

It may come as a surprise to some, especially owners, but many log
houses should be insulated to make them energy efficient. A look at the
R-values will tell one reason why. Dry wood can have an R-value of up to
1.25 per inch. Even low quality insulation has a value double that and
more.

Another problem not often considered is moisture. Where does the
moisture in the house go when the outside wall is solid wood? It still
tries to get out, and might if there are cracks in the logs.

The propensity for moisture-laden air to move outside has been utilized
in the past to make a log house better insulated. In the far north,
where winter temperatures may stay below freezing for months, it was a
common practice to seal the house from the inside. This was done by
putting several containers of water on the stove and bringing them to a
boil. The vapor traveled to the outside through the cracks. It
immediately froze on contact with the outside air, effectively scaling
the house until the outside air temperature again was above 32 degrees
Fahrenheit. This cut down on drafts and made for a snug house, at least
until the weather warmed up.

Logs have another property that helps explain why log houses don't seem
to be as cold as their R-value would indicate: They are capable of
storing heat. Logs in a house wall will absorb heat up to the
temperature of the air in the house. When the house temperature is
lowered - at night, for example - they give back heat into the rooms
until the temperature is again equalized. Unlike a block or a stone
wall, logs can be two temperatures simultaneously, one on either side.

## Chinking {.level2}

Where basic insulation for a log house is needed, even if none is
required elsewhere, is between the logs. No matter what type of log
construction is used - round fitted, flattened, three-sided, or round
with chinking - a thin layer of insulation should be put between each
log and those above and below it. This fills irregularities between the
logs and closes cracks open to the outside. Caulking or "chinking" is
then done on either side of the insulation.

The size of the logs makes a difference. Many modern log houses are made
of logs 8 inches or less in diameter. Two-sided and three-sided logs are
often only 6 inches thick. When placed in a wall, there may be only 3 or
4 inches of contact surface between the logs. This contact is the
thickness that should be considered when thinking of additional
insulation. Not only is the joint between logs thinner than the logs,
but that is the place where there will be leaks in the wall if any
exist.

Even houses made of turned logs (logs turned to a given diameter in a
large lathe, and then grooved with a machine to give a very tight fit)
need insulation and caulking where logs meet. This type of construction
is a machine-made variation of the old Scandinavian system of building
log houses. Most of these houses use logs turned to 20 inches or less in
diameter, with only about 8 inches of thickness where the logs rest on
each other.

Some log-house builders still hand-fit the logs in the same Scandinavian
style. They usually use logs from 20 to 36 inches in diameter and will
have a thickness of 12 or more inches where they join. This type of
construction is usually done only on contract.

Factory-built log houses are most common today. The logs may be only 6
to 8 inches thick, and are often squared on two or more sides for ease
in construction. One maker of log-home kits even starts with 8-by-8 inch
timbers, running them through a machine that rounds one side (for the
outside of the cabin), and puts a tongue and groove in the top and
bottom for a tight fit. The inside surface of the log is dressed smooth
so that it looks like lumber. This construction needs a strip of
insulation between the "logs" and caulking in the crack between the logs
on both the inside and the outside.

## Peeled Logs {.level2}

Some log-home builders use hand-peeled logs without doing anything else
to them. The bark of the log is removed by a man wielding a large
drawknife. Then the logs are fitted into the house by notching the ends
so there will be as small a crack as possible between each set of logs.
Usually the logs are no more than 8 inches in diameter on the small end
and no larger than 14 inches in diameter on the large end. As a wall is
built, the large end of one log is placed atop the small end of another
to get a close fit between the logs. Once the logs have been fitted for
a house at the factory, they are numbered and trucked to the home site,
where they are reassembled.

When the house is up, the gaps between the logs are stuffed with
fiberglass insulation; then a vinyl material that won't shrink away from
the logs is applied, sealing the crack. The wall between the logs may be
only 3 inches thick and filled with a material that has a lower R-value
than the logs themselves, so the insulation value is low.

## Roofs {.level2}

Log houses often differ from frame houses in the roof. In order to get
the most rustic feeling from a log house, the roof is often open beam.
In that case the insulation must be put on top. In the good old days,
sod was often the material used, with up to a couple of feet being
placed on top of the house. This entailed a heavy roof structure, as sod
can weigh up to 75 pounds a cubic foot. Even though sod has
approximately the same R-value as fiberglass, nowadays it will probably
be more expensive.

What we might term as rustic or old-fashioned was, more often than not,
done for reasons of sheer necessity by our forebears.

Log houses were built because there were more than enough trees, and the
trees needed to be cleared from the land to grow food. Sod was also
plentiful, especially in places where there was some prairie. It was
there for the taking. A couple of men with a saw and axes and a flat
shovel, often carved from a split log, could build a solid house in a
couple of days, with the expenditure of nothing more than sweat.

They also weren't concerned about fuel to keep the place warm. If it was
cold, they built the fire up more. "Energy efficiency" wasn't in their
vocabulary. Neither was "insulation," except in the far North Country
where tundra moss was used to stuff the cracks between logs or stones
and was often applied in a thick layer on the roof.

During experiments on the insulation value of indigenous building
materials, University of Alaska engineers discovered that dried tundra
moss has a higher insulation value than most manufactured insulations.
Of course, unless you live on the tundra, the cost of obtaining the moss
puts it out of reach. It is also very flammable and would probably be
banned by most fire codes.

## Adding Insulation {.level2}

Most log houses use insulation only between the logs. However, you must
do something to increase the insulation along the logs to make your
cabin truly an energy-efficient house. This means building a wall on the
inside of the log wall. This should be thick enough to provide energy
efficiency. It should also have a vapor barrier on the warm (room) side
to reduce moisture flow into the log wall as much as possible. Once the
vapor barrier is in place, the wall can be finished as desired. The
barrier is an extra expense, but if the log walls of the house are as
thin as some described earlier, it may be necessary for the conservation
of energy.

A roof on a log house has the same problems as one on a frame house, and
should be treated the same way. In order to keep the rustic effect and
utilize the efficiency of modem insulation, some log-home owners have
insulated their roof with urethane foam and then added a layer of sod to
complete the illusion of a rustic dwelling. The same problems and
benefits apply here as they do for a regular framed roof. The point is
to get the highest possible insulation value for the money spent.

*Reprinted from Home Insulation: Do It Yourself & Save As Much As 40%
(Storey Communications).*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

To save even more energy around the house, try these do-it-yourself
projects:

[Insulating Pipes and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)

[Oil Burner Tune
Up](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-youself/oil-burner-tune-up.aspx)

[Quick Checks for an Efficient, Winterized Heating
System.](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/winterize-heating-system.aspx)

[Types of Caulk and Where to Use
Caulking](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-caulk.aspx.aspx)

[Chalk
Characteristics](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/caulk-characteristics.aspx)

[Types of Weatherstripping and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)

::: divimage
[![art](images/71402-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix026.html#a71402-0)

 

File Art
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71402-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix026.html#a71402-1)

 

File Art
:::
:::

[]{#chapter030.html}

::: body
# [Quick Checks For An Efficient, Winterized Heating System](#toc.html#chap-30) {.chapter-title}

**Quick checks of home heating systems can get you ready for winter.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**October/November 1991**

## Fireplace {.level2}

Fireplaces are very inefficient heating systems. To get the most out of
yours, you should remember several tips:

-   An open or missing damper can allow as much heat to escape as an
    open door does! Close it whenever the fireplace is not in use.
-   Carefully close the damper down as far it will go while maintaining
    sufficient draft. The wood will burn longer.
-   Consider adding a hollow-tube grate. This device picks up cold air
    at baseboard level, warms it as it passes through the firebox, and
    then sends the warmed air back into the room. Some models even sport
    an electric blower.
-   A great amount of heat is lost after an evening fire, when the
    damper must be left open to let out smoke. If you often burn the
    midnight wood, try covering the fireplace opening with a sheet of
    aluminum to cut off the flow of warm air escaping up the chimney. Or
    consider adding glass doors, which allow you to watch the fire
    without any heat loss.
-   Clean your chimney at least once a year, more often if soot and
    creosote build up.

## Hot Water Radiator {.level2}

-   First, dust or vacuum your radiator (and repeat frequently during
    the season).
-   Then, "bleed" any trapped air in your unit. Use the knob at the top
    of the radiator or a key (available at hardware stores) to open the
    valve. Keep it open until hot water spurts out. It will be hot and
    should be caught in a bucket. Then close it securely. Should any of
    your radiators run cooler than normal during the winter, bleed them
    and allow the unit to refill completely with water.
-   Never put a box over your radiator. Nothing should block the flow of
    heat.
-   Build a radiator reflector to keep heat from escaping through the
    wall or nearby windows. While these reflectors (made of thin
    bubble-pack with an aluminum backing) are fairly cheap and available
    from hardware stores, it's easy to make your own. Cut a piece of
    cardboard slightly larger than the wall space behind the radiator.
    Cover with aluminum foil; then fasten behind the radiator. Whether
    you buy or build your own, take care that the reflector doesn't
    touch the unit itself or heat will be reflected into the walls
    instead of the room.

## Steam Heating System {.level2}

-   Replace any air vents that aren't working. To check, warm the system
    up and listen as the air comes out of the vent. You should hear a
    click, after which the air will stop rushing out. Or, unscrew the
    vent when the radiator is cold and blow through it. Install a new
    vent if you can't blow through it or your radiator doesn't "click"
    off.
-   Dust or vacuum radiators frequently.
-   Don't cover radiators or block their air flow.
-   Prevent sediment build-up in your boiler. Once or twice a month
    drain half a bucketful of water from the low water cut-off valve
    (looks almost like a faucet and is usually mounted near the bottom
    of the boiler with a piece of hose attached to it). Once you have
    drained off the sediment, open another valve located near the
    ceiling to let water flow to the boiler. It is important that you
    add enough water to keep the level adequate to fill the boiler
    jacket, usually shown in the glass type (sight glass) as its midway
    point. Do not add too much water at any one time if the unit is on;
    sudden temperature change can crack the boiler.

## Warm Air Heating System {.level2}

-   Replace your air filters and change them again every one or two
    months.
-   Move furniture and rugs away from registers. That breathtaking room
    arrangement can be redone next spring.
-   Check the dampers within the supply ducts coming from the furnace.
    Make sure that each is adjusted to provide even heat throughout the
    house (more to frequently used or drafty areas like a front living
    room, less to well-heated places like interior second floor
    bedrooms). To do this, position handles on the side of each duct
    near the furnace to the desired heat flow.
-   If your system is gas-fired, remember to turn off the pilot light
    next summer, using the pilot control knob (don't blow the light
    out). If you don't know how, ask your heating system service
    company.

To save even more energy around the house, try these do-it-yourself
projects:

[Insulating Pipes and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)

[Oil Burner Tune
Up](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-youself/oil-burner-tune-up.aspx)

[Types of Caulk and Where to Use
Caulking](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-caulk.aspx.aspx)

[Chalk
Characteristics](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/caulk-characteristics.aspx)

[Types of Weatherstripping and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)

[Log Home Insulation Saves
Energy](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/log-home-insulation.aspx)

::: divimage
[![art](images/71406-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix027.html#a71406-0)

PHOTO: ISTOCKPHOTO/MONKEYBUSINESSIMAGES

Fireplaces are cozy, but they can allow heat to escape. Follow these
tips to save energy this winter.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter031.html}

::: body
# [Take Your Shop Workbench With You](#toc.html#chap-31) {.chapter-title}

**This easy-to-build portable workbench gives you a stable surface to
work on when you're not in the shop.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small1} editors**

**October/November 1991**

In his day, Noah took on the world's biggest contract job without so
much as a sawhorse to his name. At the opposite pole, some - lacking the
"right" workbench or the newest equipment - would sooner chuck it all
than make do with something less than perfect.

Balderdash. Generations of industrious folk have accomplished wonders
using tools and equipment made by their own hands. Lest we forget, the
medieval system of trade education - from apprentice to journeyman to
master, still very much alive in Europe today - demands that the student
work with self-made implements, if only to foster patience and a genuine
rapport with the chosen medium. If master craftsmen can create works of
art using homemade equipment, the rest of us should feel perfectly
comfortable making household repairs with them.

Even Noah must have recognized that one absolute requirement for even
the smallest of jobs was a solid, stable surface on which to work. All
serious woodworkers have come to regard a shop workbench as only
slightly less important than their right arm. But what to do when you
are required to work away from the shop, in the forbidding wilderness
outside your own front door?

Once you've become accustomed to a real shop workbench, sawhorses seem
to come up a bit short for outdoor jobs. No vise, no work surface, no
storage. Nails end up in your mouth; tools sprout from your pockets. You
need to know yoga positions to hold a board still for sawing borders.
However, there's really no need to go without when you go out. Instead,
carry our ingenious "work aid."

Like a double-jointed pair of scissors, the two halves of the bench's
top close tighter as you bear down, making it a very effective vise.
There's room for tools and even a selection of fasteners in the two
compartments below the top. A couple of C-clamps will hold down a miter
box for comfortable trim work. And when you're done, the carpenter's
third arm folds up like a TV table.

You can find a diagram of materials to use in the image gallery.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71408-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix028.html#a71408-0)

ILLUSTRATION: JOSE DIAZ

The third arm of this portable workbench is collapsible and folds up
like a TV tray for easy storage.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71408-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix028.html#a71408-1)

JOSE DIAZ

The two halves of the top of the bench close together tightly like a
vise and also serve as compartments for tools and equipment.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71408-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix028.html#a71408-2)

CHRIS FULLER

This diagram shows the materials needed to construct this portable
workbench.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter032.html}

::: body
# [Make A Cherry Pit Heating Pad](#toc.html#chap-32) {.chapter-title}

**You can make a cherry pit heating pad that will keep your bed toasty
in the winter.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**October/November 1991**

Making a cherry pit heating pad can save you a lot of discomfort during
cold nights. After all, the unheated bedroom is no longer just a thing
of the past. Getting under the covers can be a chilly proposition now
that more people are heating their homes with wood and relying less on
central heating systems.

Children in Switzerland have long been accustomed to a certain household
ritual on winter evenings:

A cherrystone pillow for each family member is popped into the kitchen's
warming oven, and they retrieve a pillow on their way to bed. The bed
warmers work wonderfully for taking the chill off cool sheets in
unheated bedrooms.

Cherry pit heating pads could be the perfect bed and foot warmer. With
three times the heating capacity of pebbles, and a much lower
conductivity, cherry pits provide steady warmth for winter nights. With
a little faithful collecting, a bit of scrap fabric, and a Sunday
afternoons time, one of these bed warmers could save you many nights of
cold-cover shivers.

### Collect, Clean and Dry Your Cherry Pits {.level3}

It takes about 15 pies' worth of cherry pits to make one pillow. If your
family doesn't consume a large amount of cherries, you may want to head
to a cannery, where you can get pounds of pits for pennies. Cherrystones
must be thoroughly cleaned and dried before they can be sewn into
pillows.

First, place the pits in a large pan or in the kitchen sink and cover
completely with cold water. Then rub and squeeze the stones together to
loosen any remaining pulp. When that's done, rinse and repeat the
process several times.

Once the cherry pits look clean, simmer them in a pot of water -
stirring occasionally - for about 15 minutes. Then dump the cooked
stones into a sinkful of cold water and rub them again. Rinse the cherry
pits a few more times (it's absolutely essential to remove all the pulp)
before draining and placing them on clean dish towels to dry. You can
finish the dehydration process by spreading the pits in one layer across
a shallow pan and baking them in a warm oven.

Stir them now and then so they'll dry thoroughly. The pits will be
evenly colored when "done" and can then be stored indefinitely in jars,
plastic bags or paper sacks until you're ready to make your bed warmers.
(The last are the best choice, because they'll absorb any moisture to
that may still be present.)

To make the pillowcases, use a sturdy material, such as denim,
sailcloth, or drapery fabric. (Avoid any kind of synthetic material that
might melt when exposed to heat.)

Cut two rectangles measuring 8-by-11 inches or use a single
16-by-11-inch piece. Put the pieces together face to face - or fold the
double-size rectangle in half - and stitch around the edges, leaving an
opening large enough to let you turn the bag right side out. Finally,
fill the sack with the dried cherrystones (keeping it loosely packed)
and sew up the hole. You're ready for the next nippy night. To use your
cherry pit heating pad, begin by heating the pillow in either an oven
set to a very low temperature, in front of the fireplace or over a
woodstove. With any of these methods, take care that the warmers are not
exposed directly to a glowing oven element or an open flame that might
ignite the fabric. When your cushion is toasty warm, take it immediately
to your bedroom and place in bed between the cold sheets. By the time
you're ready to turn in, your bedding temperature should be just about
right.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71410-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix029.html#a71410-0)

ILLUSTRATION: MONICA FORRESTALL

Cherry pits have three times the heating capacity of pebbles.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71410-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix029.html#a71410-1)

MONICA FORRESTALL

You'll need about 15 pies' worth of pits to make a single pillow.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71410-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix029.html#a71410-2)

 

MONICA FORRESTALL

Use a hefty fabric like denim to make your pillow.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71410-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix029.html#a71410-3)

MONICA FORRESTALL

You can warm your pillow over a woodstove before bed.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71410-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix029.html#a71410-4)

MONICA FORRESTALL

Your feet (and the rest of you) will stay toasty warm on chilly nights.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter033.html}

::: body
# [Styrofoam Puffy Pillows, Can Milk At Home And More](#toc.html#chap-33) {.chapter-title}

**Make your own puffy pillows with Styrofoam packing peanuts and old
bedsheets, pick up some household uses for vinegar, find a new use for
leftover holiday tinsel, and more Country Lore.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**October/November 1991**

### Styrofoam Puffy Pillows {.level3}

How do old sheets and "puffy" Styrofoam packing pieces go together? At
our house, the two materials have been combined with some inexpensive
new cover material to create giant, futon-like pillows. Our four young
sons use the lightweight but comfortable private islands for reading,
watching television or just late-night summer stargazing.

The puffy pillows were a project for the whole family, mother and child
alike. The boys called a friend with an office machine store who was
willing to save us large amounts of the Styrofoam packing pieces.
Because each of the finished pillows is about 48 inches long by 44
inches wide and 5 inches thick, we needed a full box of the pieces -
about 24 square inches - to fill each one.

Each of the children helped sew a large pillowcase from old sheets for
the inside cover. The long side of the case was left open. Because the
inside pillowcase must keep the packing material from escaping, we
double-stitched all the seams. The inside pillowcases were then turned
to put rough edges inside.

To keep the puffy pieces from sliding to one end of the pillow, we next
sewed four "baffles," or compartments, about 12 inches apart across the
width of the pillow, still leaving the long side open for stuffing. (Our
9- and 10-year-olds were able to do most of the machine sewing of their
pillowcases with minimal help; the 6- and 8-year-olds needed a little
more.)

Next, we made an outside-cover pillowcase that was about 4 inches wider
and longer than the one in the interior. The bottom side of each cover
is recycled sheet material. To finish the top piece of each outside
cover and make a matching bolster pillow for each puffy pillow, the
children each chose two yards of 45-inch-wide new material that we found
for a dollar per yard. The new and old materials were all washed to
prevent future shrinkage.

Next, the boys stuffed the baffles of the inside pillowcase. The older
boys stood the partially filled cases up in a large box as they worked.
The younger children found it easier to stuff when their bags were
clothespinned to a low line, which left both hands free to pour the
puffies into the pillowcases. All of them used a gallon plastic milk jug
with its lid on and its bottom cut off to make a scoop to grab the
packing material and shoot it into the baffles. The puffies in the
baffles were packed in fairly tightly to prevent them from sliding
around and congregating in one end of the baffle later.

Once filled with puffies, safety pins or clothespins were used to
temporarily close up the baffle openings.

Sewing the baffles shut was the trickiest job. One baffle at a time was
hemmed by hand or straight pinned (we're not seamstresses). Rough edges
were turned inside to make the seam. Each baffle was double seamed. With
the sewing machine moved away from the wall and a boy helping to hold
the pillow as mom sewed, it was awkward but quick work.

Finally, the outside cover, with its rough edges turned inside, was
pulled over the pillow. The case was sewed together on the sewing
machine, creating a loose-fitting outside cover. When the covers get
dirty, we'll rip out a side seam and re-stitch.

When bent in the middle and leaned against a wall, one pillow seats
two - children or an adult and a child - comfortably. Two pillows
stacked together, folded in the middle and leaned against a wall, are
tall enough for a comfortable, adult-size futon chair. These multi-use
pillows are so lightweight they can be easily moved anywhere by anyone
for practically any lounging need.

***-Nicki Klein Parsons*** ***\
Montrose, Colorado***

### Donate Your Spare Garden Produce {.level3}

Don't let spare garden produce go to waste! Take it to a senior
citizens' apartment complex. You'll find plenty of eager recipients.

***-Margaret Shauers*** ***\
Great Bend, Kansas***

### Pond Scum Makes Good Fertilizer {.level3}

Whenever I go fishing or find myself around swamp or bog, I take along a
five-gallon spackling pail - the kind with a tight-fitting lid. I look
for black, watery muck with lots of decomposing vegetation, such as
sphagnum moss. Using my hands, I scoop the stuff into my pail, take it
home, and pour it into a container prepared with drain holes. Once the
water has drained away, you have prime potting soil or garden additive -
with no weed seeds! Developers may be filling in America's wetlands, but
I'm doing my very best to dig them back out.

***-Frederic Otten\
Surf City, New Jersey***

### No More Cold Steel Wrenches in Winter {.level3}

Don't freeze your fingers handling cold steel tools when you work out in
the cold this winter. Allow the tools to warm up indoors before
beginning. Then keep an old towel or a piece of rug handy to set them
down on while you work. This allows them to retain their warmth a bit
longer.

***-Joseph A. Morrison*** ***Candor, New York***

### Make Your Old Mailbox Your New Gardening Box {.level3}

How many times have you walked the distance to your garden only to find
that you have forgotten this tool or that tool, the plant food or...? As
a frequent victim of that brand of forgetfulness, I decided to lend
myself a hand.

I fixed an old mailbox to a plank near the garden and placed all the
tools that would fit inside. I painted some bright designs on the sides,
and it soon became a pleasing addition to the whole area.

So don't throw those old things away; you love Mother Earth too much.

***-Dr. R. Rimmer*** ***Lynn, North Carolina***

### Make Painting Easier (And Less Messy) {.level3}

When painting, I find that resting a brush on the edge of a bucket is a
constant cause for worry. It always slows me down because I have to
carefully maneuver around the brush as I work. And regardless of my
efforts to avoid it, the brush always falls into the paint or worse,
onto the floor or ground. It's especially irksome when I'm high up on a
ladder.

To take care of this nuisance, I simply screwed a ½-inch hook into the
wooden handle, just above the metal shank. This allows me to hang the
brush on the bucket with no worries. It allows me to move about quickly
when moving ladders and drop cloths; the dog won't knock it off, and it
also frees up a hand to carry other things. (To keep it neat, I always
wipe the brush on only one spot in the bucket before painting.) At the
end of the day, you can wrap the bristles in newspaper and hang the
wrapped brush in a one-gallon bucket of the appropriate solvent. The
brush can safely hang like this overnight, or even for a few days, until
you get around to cleaning it. The newspaper keeps the bristles straight
and unsplayed, and a wire brush will remove any dried paint near the
shank. Spinning the brush or hitting it repeatedly on your toe will
remove the excess solvent before reuse.

***-Byron Timberman*** ***\
Occidental, California***

### Make Your Own Canned Milk {.level3}

Rosie, our Milking Shorthorn/Holstein/Jersey-cross dairy cow, has
literally overwhelmed us with her milk production each spring at calving
time. Six gallons per day is far more than a small family can handle,
regardless of our frantic efforts at cheese-and butter-making and my
pleadings for everyone to eat more cereal.

The possibility of canning the excess was in the back of my mind, yet I
couldn't find a formula for the process in any of my cookbooks. It took
a visiting old-timer to our ranch - a lady of 75 who went by the name of
"Aunt Lil" - to get me started. After canning literally hundreds of
quarts, I can honestly and safely say that I've never had a spoiled
batch.

I do all my work on a woodstove, usually in the early morning before the
cabin heats up. You'll find the process cooler and easier on a gas or
electric unit. Just remember to start timing things after your canning
water has started to boil around the jars.

**Method #1:** Strain fresh milk through sterilized cheesecloth into
sterilized, warm quart jars, leaving an inch of space at the top. Let
sit for one hour, then add sterilized lids and rings. Boil for 2½ hours.
Depending on the fat content of your milk, you should end up with an
inch or two of thick cream around the neck of each jar. I spoon this off
and use it in cooking.

**Method #2:** Strain fresh milk through sterilized cheesecloth into
sterilized gallon jars. Leave overnight in the refrigerator. The next
day, skim off any cream that has risen to the top; save for other use.
Pour cold milk into sterilized, cooled-down jars (cold milk will crack
hot glass), leaving an inch of space at the top. Add the sterilized lids
and rings and boil for 2½ hours.

I like this method best because I can more easily skim off the cream for
butter or ice cream!

***-C.A. Coleman*** ***\
Cascade, Idaho***

### Protect Yourself From Deerfly Bites {.level3}

Deerfly bites are not only painful, but they can also cause severe
itching for days. I find that deerflies always land on the highest
available spot. So, when I hear them buzzing around my head, I lift both
hands into the air. They soon land near my fingers where it is easy to
slap them. This technique has saved me a lot of agony on long summer
walks.

***-Nancy L. Peckham*** ***\
Horseheads, New York***

### Herbal Tea Bags and Holiday Tinsel {.level3}

To stop that musty, yucky smell from accumulating in seasonal coolers,
ice chests and thermos bottles, put an herbal tea bag (any variety) in
after each use, or just before storage. Coffee tastes and smells can be
removed from a thermos by placing a tea bag in it with some hot water.
If you allow it to sit overnight, the taste will be gone when you pour
the water out next morning.

And, to keep the birds off your strawberries and berry bushes, here's a
hasn't-failed-yet trick: Drape your berry bushes with Christmas tinsel.
It's weatherproof, easy to obtain, recycles the Christmas stuff and adds
a nice sparkle to your garden. It's a safe, nontoxic way to protect your
fruit, but it scares away *everything*, so be sure not to use it near
nesting sites or feeders.

***-Mikki Smith\
Lexington, Michigan***

### Household Uses for Vinegar {.level3}

I have some great uses for vinegar.

1.  Vinegar takes the sting out of sunburn.
2.  Rinse your hair in vinegar and it will shine.
3.  Use a tablespoon of vinegar in four ounces of water. Gargle and
    swallow a mouthful every hour to get rid of a sore throat.
4.  Mix two parts vinegar and one part honey and drink it for a good
    hay-fever medicine.

***-Verna Bowes*** ***Crawley, West Virginia***

### Six-Pack Rings Can Be Useful After All {.level3}

I finally found a way to dispose of those plastic pull rings that
six-packs of beer and soft drinks are held together by. We live in the
country and do much of the necessary construction work ourselves. When
making cement, we simply pour all of those rings into the mixture. They
add strength to the cement, are all but invisible once in the mixture
and are not contributing to an already serious garbage-disposal problem.

***-R. Dresser*** ***\
Duncan, Oklahoma***

### Keep Your Hands Clean and Your Lawn Mower Starting Smoothly {.level3}

***Important Note:** Before trying this tip, read the cautionary note in
our* [April/May 1992 Country
Lore](http://www.motherearthnews.com/modern-homesteading/prevent-bedwetting-country-lore-zmaz92amzshe.aspx)
*that warns not to use care starter fluid in this way due to fire
hazard.*

I'm forever getting oil, grease and paint on my hands. To keep them
clean, I fill an empty spray container with turpentine and use it when I
finish a job. It's also great for cleaning oil and grease off the
handles of any tools I have to keep a good grip on. It's much cleaner
and less wasteful to spray on the stuff than pour it from a bottle.

Certain makes of a popular power mower that uses a gas-oil mixture and
runs at constant speeds can be difficult to start, even after using an
air pump four or five times. The next time you find yourself pulling or
tugging without results, don't give up! Try this first.

Look on the side of the motor. Almost all makes of this type have a
small, usually greenish plastic box that houses the foam air cleaner.
The box lid is closed by a wire spring-clip latch. Open the latch, swing
the side-hinged lid back, and you should see the foam pad. Give it a few
squirts of car starter fluid, close the little box, and snap the spring
clip back into place. Starting the mower should be a snap after this.

***-George Lynch*** ***\
Asheville, North Carolina***

::: divimage
[![art](images/77426-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix030.html#a77426-0)

PHOTO: NICKI KLEIN PARSONS

Styrofoam packing peanuts and old bedsheets can make nice, big puffy
pillows for everyday use.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter034.html}

::: body
# [I Hate My Old Tractor!](#toc.html#chap-34) {.chapter-title}

**Does your husband want to get rid of his old tractor? Here's how you
can tell.**

**By Patricia Penton Leimbach**

**October/November 1991**

*Patricia Penton Leimbach is a country homemaker and was an author of
books about life in her native rural Ohio during the 1970s and 1980s.
Her writings include "A Thread of Blue Denim," "Harvest of Bittersweet"
and this humorous anecdote from her 1977 book "All My Meadows."*

You can "smell" a new tractor coming two or three years ahead. The first
thing a wife notices is that the thrill - of the old tractor, that is -
is gone. He no longer fondles the fenders, caresses the hood. No more
does he run in the face of a storm to get 'er under cover. A crumpled
muffler may leap into the wind for months on end. The vinyl seat splits,
and he seems not to notice. Foam oozes from the rupture and is
carelessly obscured beneath a feed bag. Gone is the pride that once
moved him to slyly detour visitors through the tractor shed. It doesn't
seem very important anymore who drives the old thing - the wife even
gets a crack at it.

"Give you any trouble?" he'll ask casually at lunch. Then, as he chomps
down on a cob of corn, he'll move into phase two of the buildup:
innuendo and suggestion.

"Been startin' a little hard lately. Thought maybe you'd notice.
...Shifts a little rough, don't you think?" You can agree or disagree.
The psychological markup is in progress. The seeds of disturbances have
been sown.

"D'ja notice how much oil that tractor's been burning?" he'll say to his
son one day, making sure you're within earshot. Then early some morning,
he'll interrupt his bookkeeping by walking into the kitchen (ostensibly
for something to eat) and remarking, "Guess how much we spent for
repairs on the 706 last year?" And then he'll go on to name a figure
half again as high as the household budget.

"What?" you shriek. "On that new tractor?"

"That new tractor is ten years old."

"You're kidding."

"I am not kidding. We bought it the year the willow tree fell on the
outhouse. Remember? I'll tell you how long we've had that tractor. We've
had it so long it's paid for."

The next thing you know, there's a tractor dealer coming by on
trumped-up charges, hanging around the gas pump, leaving slick,
four-color brochures in your kitchen, "giving" your husband the kind of
time he's charging \$10 an hour for back at the shop.

Someplace in the campaign you'll be treated to the "poor lil' ol' me"
routine.

"Russ and Chuck traded their John Deeres in on a coupl'a
four-wheel-drive Cases two years ago. Don, Lenny, George, and Bob -
they've all had a complete tractor turnover since we bought that 706..."

Then there's the scare technique: "Parts are gettin' harder and harder
to locate for that machine. Wouldn't surprise me a bit if they quit
making them altogether."

About this time you'll find a list of figures on a scratch pad
conveniently placed to catch your eye - over the sink next to the
telephone, on the back of the john. You think at first it's an inventory
of all your holdings.

"Is this anything you want to keep?" you ask.

'Oh, that - that's just something the tractor dealer jotted down for me.
Uhhh...some figures on a tractor - and a plow. New tractor takes a new
plow. Says he'll take my old tractor on trade and give me just what I
paid for it ten years ago. That takes 'er on down to about fourteen
thousand."

"Fourteen thousand dollars! Holy cow! We don't want to buy the business.
We just need a tractor!"

You suddenly realize that it's all over.

*Reprinted from "All My Meadows," by Patricia Leimbach. Copyright © 1977
by Patricia Penton Leimbach.*

::: divimage
[![art](images/77428-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix031.html#a77428-0)

PHOTO: DAVID COULSON

Nothing can persuade a farmer to get rid of his old tractor like the
thought of a brand new tractor.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter035.html}

::: body
# [Different Types Of Weatherstripping And How To Weatherstrip Your Home](#toc.html#chap-35) {.chapter-title}

**A guide to choosing weather stripping materials and their uses and
applications.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**October/November 1991**

Like caulking, the hardest part of weatherstripping is figuring out
which material to use. Types of weatherstripping can range from felt,
foam, rubber, vinyl and metal weatherstrips. Using this chart, assess
your needs in each part of the house, and figure out how much you want
to spend. Then, you just need to follow a few simple weatherstripping
rules (in addition to the manufacturer's directions):

-   To determine the amount of weatherstripping needed, measure the
    perimeters of all areas to be weather stripped and then add 10
    percent to allow for waste.
-   Before installation, the surface area must be smooth and free of
    dirt or particles that might prevent the stripping from making a
    complete seal against the surface.
-   Apply one continuous strip to each joint, making sure that the
    stripping is tight at the corners.
-   After installation, check to see if it makes contact with the fixed
    and movable sections of the joint; the material should be slightly
    compressed when the door or window is shut. Take into account the
    thickness the stripping will add to a frame; in some cases, the
    frame or movable parts may have to be planed to permit proper
    closing.

## Types of Weatherstrips {.level2}

  ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Compression Gaskets**        **Made of**                                                                   **Usage**
  Felt strip                     cotton, wool or polyester                                                     mail slots, storm windows, attic hatch, nonopening windows
  Foam tape                      open-cell (polyurethane), closed-cell (vinyl)                                 open-cell: exterior basement door, attic hatch, storm windows; closed-cell: Dutch doors, metal and wood window casements, nonopening windows, storm windows, exterior basement door, attic hatch, storm door
  Sponge rubber                  neoprene                                                                      standard door sides, attic hatch, nonopening windows
  Gasket and flange              vinyl or rubber                                                               pet hatch, standard double-hung windows, garage door, exterior basement door, metal window casements, sliding windows, nonopening windows, storm windows, standard door bottom
  Reinforced gasket and flange   vinyl lip, plastic or wood flange                                             standard door sides and bottoms, storm door, garage door, Dutch doors
  Bristles in retainer           nylon bristle in metal or plastic retainer                                    sliding doors, sliding windows, storm doors
  **Tension Strips**                                                                                           
  Tension strip                  metal (copper, brass, bronze, etc.) or plastic (polypropylene, vinyl, etc.)   metal: standard door sides, standard double-hung windows, storm windows, Dutch doors, sliding windows and doors, exterior basement door, metal and wood window casements, attic hatch, nonopening windows; plastic: standard door sides, sliding windows and doors, sliding windows, metal and wood window casements, standard double-hung windows
  **Special Purpose**                                                                                          
  Door Sweep                     vinyl lip with metal, wood or plastic retainer                                standard door bottom, garage doors, wood threshold
  Threshold gasket               vinyl gasket; wood or metal threshold                                         standard door bottom
  Magnetic                       steel magnet and holders in plastic housing                                   pet hatch
  Inter-locking                  formed aluminum or brass                                                      Dutch doors
  Astragal                       metal body with vinyl lip                                                     Dutch doors
  ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To save even more energy around the house, try these do-it-yourself
projects:

[Insulating Pipes and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)

[Oil Burner Tune
Up](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-youself/oil-burner-tune-up.aspx)

[Quick Checks for an Efficient, Winterized Heating
System.](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/winterize-heating-system.aspx)

[Types of Caulk and Where to Use
Caulking](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-caulk.aspx.aspx)

[Chalk
Characteristics](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/caulk-characteristics.aspx)

[Log Home Insulation Saves
Energy](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/log-home-insulation.aspx)
:::

[]{#chapter036.html}

::: body
# [Types Of Caulk And Where To Seal Leaks](#toc.html#chap-36) {.chapter-title}

**Knowing where to caulk and what type of caulk to use can help seal
leaks in your home.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**October/November 1991**

Because as much as 80 percent of air leakage occurs in areas other than
windows and doors, caulking is an absolute winter necessity. In addition
to checking windows and doors, be sure to inspect the areas where:

-   the wooden sill of the home meets the foundation
-   dryer vents and fan covers pass through the wall
-   furnace vent stacks meet the exterior
-   any air leaks in the basement might lurk
-   plumbing pipes and telephone wires enter the home
-   any two different outside materials meet
-   the fireplace chimney meets the siding.

As a general rule, caulk where a permanent seal is desired, and
weather-strip when doors and windows must be opened.

After determining which areas need attention, it's important to choose
the right type of caulk for the job. Before buying or using a particular
caulk, read each label carefully for storage and application
temperatures. Check the descriptions below, and then refer to the chart
to determine the best caulk for the job. While the factors may be of
varying concern depending on personal preference (amount of money you're
willing to spend, lengths you are willing to go to to find a certain
caulk, time you wish to spend redoing the job in a few years), it is
important to check the temperature resistance of any caulk if you live
in a very cold climate.

**Oil-Resin Base.** This is often the least expensive. It is not
particular durable and tends to shrink and harden. It can be painted.
This material is found in most stores. It should not be used for
long-term application.

**Latex Base.** This will bond to most surfaces. It is more durable than
resin-based material, and also paintable. Some shrinkage will occur.
Adequate, but not the best material available.

**Butyl Rubber.** This paintable material will bond to most surfaces. It
is more durable than the others, but it also shrinks. This is often the
best choice for use on masonry surfaces, but not on moving joints or
places where two different materials meet.

**Polyvinyl Acetate.** This will bond to most surfaces and is more
durable, but it also shrinks and hardens. This sealant is surpassed by
other compounds.

**Nitrile Rubber.** This bonds well to metal and masonry but not to
painted materials. It is durable and paintable, but large amounts of
shrinkage are reported. Its primary use is for high moisture areas.

**Neoprene Rubber.** This will bond to most surfaces and is expensive
but durable and paintable. Moderate shrinkage is reported. This is
especially good for use in concrete walls and foundations.

**Silicone Seal.** This will bond to most surfaces except concrete. It
is very expensive and very durable but not paintable. Little shrinkage
is reported. It remains very flexible. This is an excellent caulk for
most jobs.

**Polysulfide**. This needs a primer to bond to surfaces. It is
expensive and very durable and little shrinkage is reported. This is
difficult to work with, however, and is toxic until cured. It can dry
out in arid climates.

**Polyurethane**. This will bond to most surfaces. It, too, is
expensive, very durable and paintable. Little shrinkage reported.

**Hypalon**. This requires priming for use on porous materials. It is
expensive, very durable, and paintable. Little shrinkage is reported. An
excellent caulk, easy to work with but, again, not always readily
available.

Now that you've found the correct material for the job, you're on to the
easy part, caulking your house for winter. Here's how:

1.  Before installing caulk, remove all loose material and dirt from the
    crack, or the caulk won't adhere to the surface. When caulking a
    wide crack (3/8 inch or greater), stuff it to within a fraction of
    an inch of the surface with a filler material urethane tan oakum a
    fiberglass batt) and then apply caulking material.
2.  Cut off the tip of the nozzle on the tube at an angle so that it
    gives you a bead of caulk no wider than you need. Next, pierce the
    inner seal of the cartridge. If necessary, smooth the newly applied
    bead of caulk immediately after applying it with a tool like a putty
    knife, or your fingers. You will soon acquire a technique that
    allows you to apply the caulk to the crack firmly and smooth it to
    an acceptable finish in one pass of the caulk gun. Caulk should
    adhere properly to the surfaces around the crack. Problems of
    inadequate bonding can be caused by poor cleaning of the crack area,
    incorrect caulk type, or improper placement.
3.  If the caulk that seals your storm is drying out or missing, caulk
    the top, sides and bottom of the storm-window frame from the inside
    (between the sash and storm). Leave the weep holes at the bottom of
    your storm window unplugged: they allow excess moisture to drain
    out.

Learn more about the characteristics of the different types of caulk in
[Caulk
Characteristics](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/caulk-characteristics.aspx).

To save even more energy around the house, try these do-it-yourself
projects:

[Insulating Pipes and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)

[Oil Burner Tune
Up](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-youself/oil-burner-tune-up.aspx)

[Quick Checks for an Efficient, Winterized Heating
System.](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/winterize-heating-system.aspx)

[Types of Weatherstripping and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)

[Log Home Insulation Saves
Energy](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/log-home-insulation.aspx)
:::

[]{#chapter037.html}

::: body
# [Oil Burner Tune Up](#toc.html#chap-37) {.chapter-title}

**Get your oil burner ready for winter with this 13-point checklist.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**October/November 1991**

When you schedule a tune up, ask your service company about reducing the
firing rate of the burner. Most burners are oversize, and significant
savings can be achieved by downsizing the nozzle.

The burner nozzle controls the firing rate (the rate of oil flow in
gallons per hour). Only your fuel supplier has the records necessary to
determine if this is applicable.

Make sure your serviceperson leaves a tag attached to the heating system
which records the final combustion efficiency, smoke reading, percent
carbon dioxide (CO2), net stack temperature and any other work done.
Combustion efficiency indicates what percentage of fuel your burner
turns into heat.

Make sure your tune-up also includes the following 13 key checks for a
winter-ready oil burner:

-   combustion chamber cleaned thoroughly or replaced
-   heat exchanger cleaned
-   oil-pump pressure checked and regulated, if needed
-   oil filter replaced
-   all operating and safety controls checked
-   pump and blower motors checked and oiled
-   barometric draft regulator checked, adjusted, or replaced, depending
    on its condition
-   burner fan, motor, electrodes and transformer cleaned and lubricated
-   oil pump bled (if necessary)
-   nozzle replaced (you should do this every year)
-   leaks into the unit sealed
-   potential of "baffling" installation assessed (important in older
    units)
-   final combustion tests completed; tag attached to the heating system
    which shows the final combustion efficiency.

To save even more energy around the house, try these do-it-yourself
projects:

[Insulating Pipes and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)

[Quick Checks for an Efficient, Winterized Heating
System.](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/winterize-heating-system.aspx)

[Types of Caulk and Where to Use
Caulking](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-caulk.aspx.aspx)

[Chalk
Characteristics](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/caulk-characteristics.aspx)

[Types of Weatherstripping and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)

[Log Home Insulation Saves
Energy](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/log-home-insulation.aspx)
:::

[]{#chapter038.html}

::: body
# [Insulating Pipes And Heating Ducts](#toc.html#chap-38) {.chapter-title}

**Insulating pipes and heating ducts can save you money and conserve
energy.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**October/November 1991**

One of the most cost-effective and energy-conserving measures you can
take is to insulate duct or pipe runs in the unheated areas of your
home. By not insulating these conduits, you are essentially delivering
heat that you've paid for to areas of your house you never use. One very
important note: Never place duct or pipe insulation within 3 feet of the
heating system, exhaust flues, or any other high temperature areas.

To insulate, install vinyl or foil-backed fiberglass duct insulation to
all heating system supply ducts. You can also use regular-faced
fiberglass insulation, which is less expensive and has a higher R-value
(a measure of the ability to retard heat flow; the higher the number,
the better the insulation). To determine how much insulation you need,
first measure the distance around each section of duct and multiply that
by the total length. Order about 30 percent more than the amount
calculated to account for the overlaps needed for fastening.

Before you insulate, be sure to seal all air leaks in the system with
duct tape and/or a high-temperature caulk such as silicone. Then, cover
the supply ducts with insulation and secure it using clinch-type staples
(preferred), wire or tape. Although not as long-lasting as staples, duct
tape is easier to install. The tape should be wrapped completely around
the duct and overlapped. The backing of the insulation must be on the
outside surface. Exposed fiberglass and all joints between pieces of
insulation should be covered with tape.

Damper control handles must be left in an accessible and operable
position. Any labels on the ducts should be transferred to the outside
of the insulation. Do not insulate your return ducts.

To insulate your pipes, follow these rules:

-   For hot-water systems, install "electrometric" or urethane rubber
    pipe insulation with a suggested minimum R-value of 6 - only on
    supply pipe. This insulation may not be used in applications where
    the temperature of the pipe exceeds 200 degrees Fahrenheit (such as
    on steam pipes).
-   For steam systems, install molded fiberglass pipe insulation with a
    minimum recommended R-value of 6 on all supply pipes. Before you
    purchase the insulation, carefully measure the outside diameter and
    lengths required. Remember to add a little for waste at joints.
-   Before installation, check for leaks in the system. If you find any,
    repair it before you proceed.
-   To install, place pipe insulation over the pipes, and seal with
    glue, duct tape or appropriate fasteners. Exposed ends of insulation
    sections at joints should be tightly scaled to eliminate air flow
    beneath the insulation.

To save even more energy around the house, try these do-it-yourself
projects:

[Oil Burner Tune
Up](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-youself/oil-burner-tune-up.aspx)

[Quick Checks for an Efficient, Winterized Heating
System.](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/winterize-heating-system.aspx)

[Types of Caulk and Where to Use
Caulking](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-caulk.aspx.aspx)

[Chalk
Characteristics](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/caulk-characteristics.aspx)

[Types of Weatherstripping and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)

[Log Home Insulation Saves
Energy](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/log-home-insulation.aspx)
:::

[]{#chapter039.html}

::: body
# [Energy Saving Guide For Winter Quiz](#toc.html#chap-39) {.chapter-title}

**By answering a few questions, you can find out if your home is winter
ready. Then, follow the advice to winterize your home.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**October/November 1991**

Okay. You've cleaned out the gutters, sealed off any exterior water
pipes, fixed the driveway and patched the screen that your kid put a
baseball through sometime in June. Feeling buckled down for winter? A
thorough house tour and our quiz may reveal the crack that your
home-energy money has been falling through.

**1. Are your rooms cold, even though you hear your heating system
running?**

Solution: Your heat cannot escape into the room. Either the flow of heat
is blocked by objects or your heaters need cleaning and bleeding. To
learn more about solving this problem read [Quick Checks for an
Efficient, Winterized Heating
System](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/winterize-heating-system.aspx).

**2. Is your log cabin insulated?**

Solution: Much to the surprise of many log-home owners, you do need to
insulate. To learn more about this topic read [Log Home Insulation Saves
Energy](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/log-home-insulation.aspx).

**3. Are you confident that your pipes won't freeze?**

Solution: If not, add "heat tape" and insulation. Read [Insulating Pipes
and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)
to learn more.

**4. Do you find the winter wind creeping under your door, despite the
fact that you weatherstripped last year?**

Solution: If yes, you should check to see that your weatherstripping is
in good enough condition to form a firm seal between the moveable parts
and the frame. If not, redo it. See [Different Types of Weatherstripping
and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)
for more information.

**5. Do you have uninsulated hot-air ducts or steam or hot water pipes
in unheated spaces?**

Solution: Look in your basement, crawl space, garage - even in your
attic. Any you find are delivering hear to unused space and should be
insulated. Read [Insulating Pipes and Heating
Ducts](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/insulating-pipes-and-heating-ducts.aspx)
to learn more about fixing this problem.

**6. Are your exterior door and windows creating cold drafts? Can you
rattle your windows in their frames or see daylight between storm frames
and your house?**

Solution: If this is true, you can install new tight-fitting storm
windows and doors, weatherstripping or caulk window and door frames on
the outside of your home. Read [Types of Caulk and Where to Use
Caulking](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-caulk.aspx.aspx)
and [Types of Weatherstripping and How to Weatherstrip Your
Home](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-yourself/types-of-weatherstripping.aspx)
to learn more.

**7. Has a qualified technician tuned up your oil burner in the last
year?**

Solution: When you schedule a tune up, ask your service company about
reducing the firing rate of your oil burner. Most burners are oversized,
and significant savings can be achieved by downsizing the nozzle. While
some older burners cannot be tuned to efficiencies about 70 percent,
newer units can reach between 75 and 85 percent and any improvement in
efficiency is money in your pocket. Read [Oil Burner Tune
Up](http://www.motherearthnews.com/do-it-youself/oil-burner-tune-up.aspx)
to learn more.

**8. Is your attic floor, rood or ceiling structure well-insulated?**

Solution: If it is not insulated at all or if less that 4 inches of
insulation exists, adding insulation could pay for itself within four to
seven years.

**9. Are your exterior walls insulated?**

Solution: If you don't know, you can find out by drilling small holes
through inconspicuous interior walls (such as a closet) and looking
inside. Or remove a switch plate or outlet cover on the exterior wall
and carefully probe the outside of the electrical box where it meets the
wall covering. If no insulation exists, it is wise to consider adding
insulation - the energy savings would outweigh the costs.

**10. Are your floors cold and drafty?**

Solution: If so, you may want to either (1) insulate the underside of
the floor, which is your basement or crawl space, or (2) insulate the
walls of your crawl space or basement.

**11. Is your freestanding domestic hot water heater warm to the
touch?**

Solution: If so, then you need to insulate your water heater storage
tank. Insulated wrappers save wasted energy and are easily installed.
:::

[]{#part003.html}

::: body
![art](images/1991-12-01.jpg)
:::

[]{#chapter040.html}

::: body
# [Country Lore: Ideas For Reusing Junk Mail, Candle Wax And More](#toc.html#chap-40) {.chapter-title}

**Read advice from readers on ways to reuse and recycle junk mail into
seed starters, how to turn old candle wax into elegant wax seals for
your letters, and the natural healing powers of fennel and pennyroyal,
plus more.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**December 1991/January 1992**

## Baby Talk: Reusing Baby Formula Cans {.level2}

The trouble with most baby formula cans is that you never use all of the
formula in one meal, and the cans don't come with a plastic cap to
preserve the remainder of the contents. Well, in my travels I have
discovered a few. Both Hershey's Chocolate Syrup and Frito-Lay dip
containers have removable tops that fit these formula cans very well.

So after you've polished off the chocolate milk or dived into the dip
for the last time, save those lids. You never know what they will fit
next.

*Susan Dawson*

*Richmond, Virginia*

## New Life for Candle Wax Stubs {.level2}

Even though it may look as if there's nothing left to be done with those
old candle stubs, they still have plenty of life in them. Melt a few
drops of wax at the end of the stub and use it to seal an envelope that
has lost its stick. Melted wax makes a fine adhesive for almost any
paper surface, and the old-fashioned seal looks great. You can also
throw stubs in with your kindling to use as fire starters. Finally,
drawers will stick less and slide much easier when you rub candle wax on
the metal runners inside them.

*Sheila Carpenter*

*St. Cloud, Minnesota*

## Bag It! {.level2}

Before starting a messy project such as painting, cut holes for your
head and arms in a trash bag. When you are finished, simply dispose of
the bag, and your clothes will be clean.

*Rachel Hartman*

*Perris, California*

## Herbal Remedies Using Fennel and Pennyroyal {.level2}

Fennel is one of those general all-around plants that has been held in
high regard from time immemorial as a food, flavoring, tea, medicine and
insect repellent. Eating the feathery leaves or drinking a strong tea
made from them temporarily cuts down on the appetite. Additionally, dry
fennel leaves make a good flea repellent. Pennyroyal is also a
repellent. A crushed handful of pennyroyal rubbed on exposed skin acts
as a natural insect inhibitor. It keeps fleas at bay and will also drive
moths out of cottons and woolens.

*N. W. Smeathers*

*Anamosa, Iowa*

## New Ways to Recycle and Reuse Junk Mail {.level2}

Here's a way to use the stream of junk mail (bulk mail, according to the
Postal Service) that comes to your mailbox every day, grow healthier
seedlings and save money, too! We make our own organic soil mix using
this formula from *The New Organic Grower* by Eliot Coleman:

**Mix:**

-   *2 buckets black peat (peat humus)*
-   1/2 *cup lime*

**Mix:**

-   *2 buckets course sand (builder's sand)*
-   2 *buckets brown peat (sphagnum)*
-   *3 cups base fertilizer* (*1cup blood meal, 1 cup colloidal
    phosphate, 1 cup greensand)*

**Mix above ingredients.**

**Add:**

-   *1 bucket garden soil*
-   *1 screened bucket of compost (2-year-old is best)*

You can use a commercial mix, but we find this formula produces a
healthier plant, as it provides excellent root growth and vital
nutrients. You'll need a standard stapler to make the pots. Take a piece
of junk mail the size of a business envelope and at least two layers
thick (an 8-by-10-inch piece of paper folded lengthwise will work). Use
two, three or four fingers to form a paper cylinder 1 to 4 inches in
diameter. Staple the top where it overlaps and then as far as the
stapler will reach (about 3 inches). Then fold the bottom in and fill
with moist potting mix. As the paper softens, the bottom will settle in.
I use wood flats lined with plastic to hold moisture, or you can use
cardboard soda flats from your local convenience store. They will hold
25 to 50 plants, depending on the size of your pots. I put a half inch
layer of brown peat on the bottom to absorb moisture. Because the pots
are 3 to 4 inches deep and the bottoms of the pots are open, plants
develop much better root systems. I prefer to start seeds in a starter
flat and then transplant them into these junk mail pots when the
seedlings get their first true leaves. When you're ready, you can plant
the whole thing or remove the paper and know that at least some use has
come of that tree cut down to make junk mail.

*Sharon L.*

*Carson Delmar,Delaware*

## Crumbs the Ants Will Hate {.level2}

If you're bothered with ants coming into your house, go to the hardware
store and get a square of synthetic camphor. Put a few crumbs on a piece
of paper and place where the insects enter the house. Three or four days
later, they will stop coming near the entrance and never come back!

*Terry McLendon*

*Woodacre,California*

## How to Remove Corrosion on Battery Cables - And They'll Taste Great, Too! {.level2}

Ever have a corrosion problem on your battery cables where they connect
to the battery post? Well, I did, and here's what I did to avoid the
trouble in the future.

Wet the terminals and sprinkle with baking soda. A few drops of water
will get this to foaming. When it stops, hose off and repeat if
necessary. Use a wire brush and clean the terminals well. Now, dry the
terminals and coat them with white corn syrup. (Make *sure* it is the
white variety.) This will dry hard, and you won't have any corrosion
problems after that.

Should you need to loosen the cables, a knife will cut right through the
hardened "corrosion eliminator."

*Tom Brantley*

*Coquille. Oregon*

## Homemade, Recycled Christmas Gift Tags and Solving Bolt Rust {.level2}

To help in recycling - and because we live in the country and cannot
always get to stores in the winter just before Christmas - we recycle
Christmas cards to use the next year as Christmas tags on presents. We
cut out the picture scenes on the fronts of old cards by laying off the
scene in a rectangular shape with ruler and light pencil lines. Then we
cut these out with the scissors just inside the lines, usually about
2-by-4-inches long. After that we punch a hole in one end and string a
piece of red or green cotton knitting yarn through. Then we store these
labels away until the gift wrapping season next Christmas.

I often come upon a bolt that has a rusted-on nut that needs to be
removed and replaced, but is in a position that I can't get to easily
with a hacksaw. I've found that by chucking my 6 ½-inch masonry abrasive
wheel into my drill - and holding it while running up against the bolt
between the bolt head and nut - I can grind it in two in short order.

It sure beats hard hacksawing in cramped spaces, and saves valuable
time.

*George Lynch*

*Asheville. North Carolina*

## Spotless Windshields {.level2}

For a cleaner windshield, just add 1 to 2 tablespoons of dishwashing
detergent to your windshield-wiper fluid. It seems to make the mixture
work much better and helps to remove grime more quickly.

*Dennis Slodysko*

*Shade Gap, Pennsylvania*

## Portable Motor Oil by Refilling Bottles of Maple Syrup {.level2}

The push-pull top of a syrup bottle makes it an excellent choice for
storing and using motor oil that has to be added to chain saws, boat
motors, garden gear, or any machinery requiring a gas and oil mixture.

These leak-proof bottles are exceptionally sturdy and are available in
different sizes. The big plus is that the handle allows you to hang it
from your utility belt, which makes the bottle handy if you're up a
tree, on a lake or away from the tool shed. My brother is a forester for
the state of Michigan and these oil-filled syrup bottles are standard
gear for the chain saw operators.

After accidentally splattering my new white Levis with deck stain, I was
determined to save them. I gathered about half a dozen colors of old
paint, dipped in a toothbrush, and spattered on a spectrum of tints. I
turned a costly "lost cause" into a customized artistic creation. An
all-over light smattering of black will enhance any color scheme you
choose.

This also works very well on canvas tennis shoes that have been spotted
or stained during the last painting chore.

*Mikki Smith*

*Lexington, Michigan*

## Foiled Again {.level2}

Fit aluminum foil around phones, doorknobs and other hardware when
painting. It's simple to remove when the paint is dry and eliminates
lots of messy cleanup.

*Pat Juenemann*

*Clements, Minnesota*

## Anticipation: Refilling Ketchup Bottles {.level2}

After what must have added up to hours of waiting, I discovered a way to
speed up the process of refilling a squeeze bottle with ketchup. If you
insert a bendable straw into the bottle to be emptied, it allows air to
flow into the bottle and the ketchup to flow out quickly and easily.

*Douglas Sity*

*Racine, Wisconsin*

## Ants, Rodents...and Lemons? {.level2}

To keep cats, rabbits or any other rodents out of your garden or flower
bed, sprinkle cayenne pepper on the perimeter of the area you want
protected. One whiff, and they will not be the least bit interested.

Use bird feeders to help eliminate the ant population in your yard by
positioning the bird feeder above the ant nest. This will encourage the
birds to eat the ants as well as the feed.

Lemon halves rubbed onto your white porcelain sink will keep it white
and free of mold and mildew. After rubbing the sink, let stand for an
hour or more before using the sink.

*Bindy Beck-Meyer*

*Novato. California*

## Bonfires to Get Rid of Fleas {.level2}

Here's a guaranteed, sure-fire method to completely eliminate a flea
infestation on your dog or around his doghouse. First, late in the
evening, chain your dog to his doghouse. Then, at a safe distance, build
a small bonfire and let it burn overnight near his house.

Fleas are insatiably attracted to heat and will soon become enamored of
the fire, leave your dog and his environs, jump into the flames and die.
The next day you will find that all of the fleas are gone.

*Janet Dawn Wilson*

*Bardwell, Kentucky*

## Homemade Broth Storage {.level2}

It's always a good idea to save the broth after cooking meats - it's a
great flavor additive to lots of other dishes and helps to stretch your
grocery dollar just a bit farther. The trouble is that the pan used to
store it in takes up too much room, and lots of the stuff seems to go to
waste. However, I've found a way to store it a bit more conveniently.

Pour the broth into a cake pan (include any small pieces of meat as
well) and place in the freezer. After a little while it will be cool
enough to cut into small squares. Place each of these squares into a
plastic bag and put back into the freezer. Use each packet to season
green beans, potatoes, ham pot pie, or anything else that can use a bit
of extra flavor.

*Ash Yeager*

*Bolivar;Pennsylvania*

## Regarding Cleaner Wicker {.level2}

I have a tip for cleaning wicker before refinishing it with a fresh coat
of varnish. Make a saturated solution of oxalic acid by mixing water and
as much oxalic acid as will dissolve. Apply this solution to the wicker
with a paintbrush and let dry overnight. The next day, rinse off the
oxalic acid solution and soil by applying water with a paintbrush. Allow
to dry completely before varnishing. Oxalic acid may be purchased at
your local pharmacy and does not require any sort of prescription.

*Andrew E. Guskea, Jr.*

*Corry, Pennsylvania*

## Don't Go With the Flow: Safety Seals for Conservation {.level2}

Have you ever tried to pour the right amount of cooking oil, instant
coffee or something else from a bottle that the manufacturer has
scientifically designed to waste the product and increase sales?

You can use the safety seals over the opening to better control the flow
rate. For example: A toothpick-size hole in the top of a bottle of
hydrogen peroxide will allow a drop at a time on a scratch rather than a
lot dumped all over everything.

In addition, making small openings will slow the rate of the product's
evaporation and will probably save you even more money.

*Orville Bodie*

*Austin, Texas*

## Hand Mixer for No-Stir Peanut Butter {.level2}

Regarding the "Do It Yourself Peanut Butter," on page 25 of issue No.
127: The letter states that a minor disadvantage of this butter is that
you need to stir the oil back into the contents before each use. My
grandmother had a tip to remedy this problem. Set the container aside,
and the next day, after making sure the lid is securely closed, turn it
upside down. On the day after that, turn it right side up. Continue
turning it and you will find that the oil doesn't know which end is up,
resulting in a consistently smooth and even mixture. Turn once a day,
and you may never have to stir again!

*Thomas A. Brantley*

*Coquille. Oregon*

## Energy Savings? {.level2}

In regard to the letter in Country Lore (issue No. 127) from Ross
Westergaard entitled "Cool Savings\": He thinks he is saving energy by
freezing ice packs in his freezer and using them to cool his
refrigerator. Either he is pulling your leg or he has forgotten his
science lessons. One of the basic laws of science says that energy lost
must equal energy gained. Freezing ice packs in a neighbor's freezer may
save money, but not energy. Possibly his freezer and refrigerator run on
different energy sources (kerosene vs. electricity perhaps), or maybe
his freezer is better insulated and has a more energy-efficient motor.
Then he would see a difference in the cost of his electricity. But the
energy used to refreeze the ice packs must be equal to the energy saved
in the refrigerator. In fact, it is impossible for him to break even.
There will always be a loss of energy - most likely in the transport of
the ice packs and in opening and closing the freezer and fridge doors.

*Phyllis A. Perry*

*Holts Summit, Missouri*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71580-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix032.html#a71580-0)

PHOTO: DENNIS SLODYSKO

This reader recommends a cheap, easy way to keep your windshield cleaner
than ever.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71580-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix032.html#a71580-1)

 

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Add bird feeders on top of ant hills to not only attract more wildlife
to your yard but also help get rid of the pests!
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71580-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix032.html#a71580-2)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Get rid of fleas --- and celebrate --- with a bonfire.\
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71580-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix032.html#a71580-3)

SHARON L. CARSON

A reader turns her unwanted junk mail into a way to start her seeds for
the growing season.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter041.html}

::: body
# [How To Build A Toy Box](#toc.html#chap-41) {.chapter-title}

**Use these free woodworking plans to build a toy chest for your
child.**

**By Percy W. Blandford**

**December/January 1991**

With Christmas just around the corner, you could build a toy box and
simultaneously solve the two biggest challenges for any parent: what to
put under the tree and how to con the kids into picking up their room.
You may still find apple cores from the last harvest left under the bed,
but we promise that this box will be a big help in keeping those small,
easy-to-lose toys together. With its compartments and sliding tray, the
toy box encourages kids to put away playthings in an orderly manner and
to develop a system to help them find what they want (without bothering
you).

The box is about the size of a blanket chest. You may wish to modify
size to suit your needs, but the instructions are for a box 15 inches
wide and deep and 30 inches long. Construction is mainly with plywood
panels stiffened with three-quarter-inch-square solid wood strips. There
are no special joints to cut. If glue is used, it should be satisfactory
to attach strips with nails at about 3-inch spacing, with screws at
corner joints and anywhere where greater loads may be expected.

First, make two end assemblies (Fig. B in the diagram in the image
gallery). Top and bottom strips go across, and the uprights fit between
them. Then, cut the plywood for the two sides (Fig. C). Mark the
positions of the divisions and the runners (Fig. D). Attach the
half-inch-square runners to the sides. Cut back enough to fit inside the
end. Put the outside stiffening strips on the top and bottom edges of
the sides.

Make the two divisions the same widths as the ends. The taller one
should come within half an inch of the top edge of a side. The lower one
should be notched to fit around the runners and should come to within
about an eighth of an inch of their top edges. Round the top edges of
both divisions. Drill a hole three-quarters of an inch down from the
center of the top of the taller division to take the cord which will
hold the opened lid. Lightly countersink both sides. Join the sides to
the ends and add the divisions.

Cut the bottom slightly oversize and attach it to the ends and sides to
hold the assembly square. Plane the edges of the bottom level and add
blocks under the corners, either as attachment points for the casters or
to serve as feet if you do not want casters. Strengthen the top corners
with screws driven from the stiffening strips on the sides into the
stiffening strips on the ends. Round the comers of the stiffening
strips, top and bottom. Take sharp edges off all around.

Cut the lid to come level at the hinge side, but overhang a quarter of
an inch at the ends and front (Fig. F). Round all edges and corners,
except the hinged edge. Use three hinges, which may be 2 inches long. If
the hinges are thin, it should be satisfactory to fit them without
setting them in, but thick ones will be neater and cause less gap if the
bottom leaf is set in.

Plywood half an inch thick does not provide much grip for screws, so it
would be better to rivet the hinges to the lid. If you do not have
suitable soft metal rivets, use copper nails. Drill and drive through
each nail, then cut off its end (Fig. G), leaving enough to hammer into
the countersunk hole of the hinge (Fig. H).

Drill a hole in the lid for the cord to match the position of the hole
in the division. Countersink it slightly on both sides. Colored braided
cord, about 3/16-inch in diameter, would be suitable. Screw the hinges
to the rear edge of the box.

Although softwood will be satisfactory for other parts of the box, the
blocks for the rope loops are better made of a close-grained hardwood.
Cut them to shape (Fig. J) 1 1/2-inches thick and drill a hole for the
rope, which may be about three-eighths of an inch in diameter. Attach
the blocks with glue and three or four screws from inside.

The sliding tray is a box, which may be of solid wood or cutoffs of
half-inch plywood. Nail or screw corners and add a quarter-inch plywood
bottom. The division may have two finger holes for lifting and sliding
(Fig. K).

A painted finish would be appropriate. A light color inside adds
visibility. The outside could be darker, or you may choose pink for a
girl or blue for a boy. You could add the child's name and other painted
or decal decorations. Screw on furniture-type casters under the corners.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reprinted from Percy W. Blandford's One-Weekend Country Furniture
Projects ( TAB Books). December/January 1992

::: divimage
[![art](images/71584-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix033.html#a71584-0)

 

PHOTO: TAB BOOKS

You can execute these DIY toy box plans all by yourself.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71584-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix033.html#a71584-1)

 

TAB BOOKS

Use these diagrams with our toy chest plans to make the perfect place
for your children to put their toys.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71584-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix033.html#a71584-2)

 

TAB BOOKS

The materials needed to build a toy box with our plans.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71584-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix033.html#a71584-3)

TAB BOOKS

The toy box plans in this article were exerpted from this book.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter042.html}

::: body
# [Soup Secrets From Betty Spierling](#toc.html#chap-42) {.chapter-title}

**Need a tasty hot soup for a cold winter day? Try one of these
delicious options from soup master Betty Spierling!**

**By Mary Karenou**

**December 1991/January 1992**

Growing up in Harbor Springs, Mich. (a small town on Lake Michigan and a
Petoskey stone's throw from the Mackinaw Bridge and Michigan's Upper
Peninsula), there were only so many things to do on the typically 15
degrees Fahrenheit winter days, and all of them involved snow. So,
bright and early at 7:30 a.m. each Saturday and Sunday morning, my dad
would haul us five kids out of bed, stuff us with amounts of pancakes
and sausage he believed would keep us from freezing to death, conduct a
hat-and-mitten check, and pack all of us in the van for the 10 minute
ride to Nub's Nob.

Nub's is a ski mountain (my Colorado friends laugh at this description
and draw an analogy to the expression "making a mountain out of a
molehill"), but to us kids, it was a winter wonderland. Each of us would
pair off or ski alone for most of the morning. My two older brothers
would break the speed record for schussing the black diamonds, while my
older sisters alternated stylishly-skied runs while flirting in the lift
line. Me, well, I was stuck with wearing a garish blue-and-white
checkered snowsuit, which assured my father - from any chair lift on the
hill - of a quick spot-check as to my whereabouts and state of physical
being.

But promptly at 1 p.m., we'd all stash our skis, loosen our boots and
stomp into the cafeteria. It was time for lunch.

Looking back, it's hard to explain what was so magical about sloppy
joes, burgers, fresh cookies and pies and those black tureens filled
with soul-satisfying soup.

But to a semi-frozen, drippy-nosed five-year-old, it was the food of the
gods. And despite my consumption of roughly 350 sloppy joes with onions
and umpteen slices of Marvel's marvelous pecan pie, it was the soups
that stuck to my ribs then and stick in my mind now: chicken noodle with
noodles so egg-rich and chewy you could make a meal out of them...creamy
cream of tomato that deftly avoided the trap of tasting like watered
down ketchup...beef barley rich with meat and tender grains.

While the ladle got passed once or twice since my early days, I'm happy
to report that the same wonderful soups are still being created today,
by sisters Betty Spierling and Pauline Steele. And I'm also happy to
report that, after years of prodding and some heavy persuasion, Betty
has decided to share her soup secrets and favorite recipes with MOTHER's
readers.

## Beef Barley Soup {.level2}

*2 20-ounce packages frozen mixed vegetables\
1 cup soup barley\
1 pound hamburger browned\
1 large onion, diced\
4 stalks celery, diced\
White pepper\
2 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce\
1/8 teaspoon granulated garlic\
3 drops Tabasco\
Kitchen Bouquet (optional)*

Start with a homemade beef-soup base, or use a prepared beef-soup base
as directed on jar (available at supermarkets). Place barley in 5 to 6
quarts of water, depending on how hearty you want your soup. Add all
seasonings plus the onion and celery, cook about 4 to 5 minutes until
the barley is almost cooked, then add meat and mixed Vegetables and
simmer until done. If the soup doesn't have a nice brown color, add a
few drops of Kitchen Bouquet (available at supermarkets).

##  {.level2}

## Navy Bean Soup {.level2}

*1 pound navy beans\
1 cup diced ham\
1/2 cup diced carrots\
1/2 cup diced celery\
12 cup diced onions\
1 cup diced raw potatoes\
White pepper\
Small amount of Worcestershire sauce\
Pinch granulated garlic\
Parsley flakes\
Chicken bouillon or soupbone*

Soak beans overnight or most of the day in 2 quarts of water. Drain
water when the beans are finished soaking, and add remaining ingredients
to a kettle or Crockpot. Add water until it occupies almost twice the
space of the beans. Bring to a boil and simmer until the beans are done.

##  {.level2}

## Hamburger and Cabbage Soup {.level2}

*1 quart canned tomatoes or tomato juice\
1 large onion, diced\
1 ½ cups diced celery\
1/8 teaspoon granulated garlic\
White pepper\
6 to 8 bouillon cubes or beef soupbone\
½ cup raw rice\
1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce\
1 pound hamburger\
1 cup dried cabbage\
Parsley (optional)*

Heat 2 quarts of water and add bouillon and the remaining ingredients.
Simmer for 20 minutes. Brown meat and add, along with cabbage, to pot.
Cook until rice and cabbage are tender. Parsley may also be added.

##  {.level2}

## Chicken Noodle {.level2}

*3 to 4 pounds raw chicken\
4 quarts water\
4 large carrots, diced\
4 stalks celery, diced\
1 medium onion, diced\
1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce\
White pepper\
Pinch granulated garlic\
Chicken bouillon or soupbone to taste\
1 to 1 ½ pounds Reames frozen noodles (available at most supermarkets)\
Parsley (optional)*

Cook chicken in 4 quarts of water until done. Remove bones and dice the
meat. Chill stock and skim the fat off the top. Add enough water to make
about 6 quarts of stock, then toss in the vegetables and seasonings.
Simmer about 20 minutes. Add meat and return to a boil. Add frozen
noodles and simmer until tender. Top off the soup with a little chopped
parsley.

##  {.level2}

## Tomato Soup {.level2}

*3 large cans tomato juice\*\
1 quart canned tomatoes\
1 large onion, diced\
3 stalks celery, diced\
Chicken bouillon or soupbone to taste\
1/8 teaspoon allspice\
White pepper\
¼ cup or more sugar to taste\
½ cup or more of powdered coffee creamer*

Roux to thicken. Saute onion and celery in small amount of oil until
tender. Add the rest of the ingredients except creamer and simmer for 15
minutes. Then add creamer (less fat and cholesterol than cream) and
thicken to desired consistency.

To make roux, melt 1 pound oleo and add 3 to 3 ½ cups of flour. Simmer
on stove about 5 minutes but do not let brown. The recipe may not
require all of this, but what is left can be used for gravy or stored in
the fridge for later use.

\*If juice seems to have a high acid content, add a pinch of soda.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71586-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix034.html#a71586-0)

PHOTO: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

The soup masters of Nub's Nob (from left); Betty Spierling and Pauline
Steele stir up a pot of hearty fare.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter043.html}

::: body
# [Advice From A Farm Vet On Caring For Livestock Animals In Winter](#toc.html#chap-43) {.chapter-title}

**Farm vet Dr. John Mettler, Jr., offers advice to readers about raising
livestock and animals in winter weather. He discusses proper livestock
shelters, necessary winter equipment and how to care for animals in the
snow to maintain good livestock health through the colder months.**

**by [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**December 1991/January 1992**

People who raise livestock often have questions about how to best care
for their beloved animals in winter months. When readers came to us with
their questions about how to best maintain animal health through the
harsh winter months, we went straight to an expert: Dr John Mettler Jr,
D. V.M. He has practiced as a large-animal country vet for more than 40
years in rural New York State and is the author of two animal books, and
an expert in horse health. The answers below will help you decide on the
proper cattle supplies, horse supplies and other winter equipment that
will help you provide for your animals all winter long.

**Q: A few years ago, I started keeping beef cattle, a milk cow, a few
hogs, sheep and two horses on a farm in Vermont. Neighbors tell us that
recent winters have been mild for this part of New England and that
we're due for more normal weather with deep snow and below-zero
temperatures in the coming months. Will this cause health problems, such
as respiratory disease, in our livestock?**

**A:** If you maintained good livestock health during these past few
milder New England winters, you'll do just fine when you have your
animals in the snow. Still, Mother Nature shouldn't be underestimated:
handling horses in the snow, proper cow care in cold weather and the
necessary winter equipment are all situations worth preparing for before
winter comes full force. It's important to know how to prevent
weather-related winter health problems before they occur.

The two most important factors in livestock health are the effects, both
internally and externally, of air and water: Both should be fresh and
pure, and too much or too little of either will cause problems. All
livestock suffer from the cold if they are wet. Cattle and horses, if
given access to three-sided, shed-type livestock shelters open to the
east or south, will stand under it during a cold rain, but will often be
found outside, bedded down or feeding, on a cold clear night or day.
Even with their backs covered with snow, the dry air trapped in their
longhair coat insulates them from the cold (like the unmelted snow on
the roof of a well-insulated house, it is an indication that the cow or
horse is warm inside).

A tight but well-ventilated old cow barn that will stay above freezing
if it is full of cows would not be the best place for a lone dairy cow.
Perhaps you could rearrange things and keep your sheep and/or horses
with her. Keep in mind that your dairy cow will get along fine in a
cold, open shed (as does a beef cow), but milking at below-freezing
temperatures is not particularly comfortable for the human part of the
operation.

Hogs are okay in cold weather, but should be bedded heavily enough in
their hog house so that they have a warm place to lie. After a really
heavy snowstorm, you'll want to shovel a path from the hog house to the
feed trough so that your hogs won't become snowbound.

Too little water is more of a problem in cold weather than in hot - even
a skim of ice over a water bucket may keep a horse from drinking. All
animals drink more water, and will do better, if it is slightly warmed.
A freeze-proof waterer is a good investment. You may construct one
yourself, but be extremely careful to avoid voltage leaks that will
discourage drinking or, if strong enough, even kill. Horses not drinking
enough because of cold weather may become impacted (constipated) and
colicky. Cows and horses deprived of water for several hours may drink
too much at one time and develop severe indigestion or colic. In
blizzard conditions, watering is a life-or-death matter.

Water is even critical for maintaining food levels, as animals will stay
bunched up in or out of livestock shelters and not move to where feed
is. Even if hay and feed is carried to them, they won't eat without
water. Contrary to popular belief, grain does not help to keep
ruminants - cattle, sheep, goats, deer and horses - warm, but hay does.
The bacterial breakdown of roughage in the rumen and in the horse's
cecum creates heat, so increase hay during colder-than-normal weather.

Also be cautious of sudden severe icing over hard-packed snow, as frozen
ground in barnyards can lead to broken legs and other animal injuries.
If your animals can't be confined to stables and you need to put your
cattle and horses out in snow, you may required to use sand, sawdust,
hayseed or wood ashes.

All classes of livestock need plenty of fresh air, but it's often
difficult to protect them from extreme cold and wind-driven snow or rain
without creating drafts or closing a building so tight that air becomes
damp and foul. In general, other than sheep near lambing, horses after
heavy workouts and hogs, most livestock tolerate winter better in a
three-sided shed than in a tight, unventilated barn. A tighter barn is
certainly needed if ewes are to lamb in winter, but I'd rather have it
below freezing inside than to close it tight. Dairy cattle need a little
more protection, as do horses that are worked enough in winter to sweat.
Horses cooled properly and blanketed until dry can tolerate cold, dry
air far better than they can warm air that is damp and foul. Newborn
lambs and beef calves should have areas heated by electric bulbs with
access to the mother for nursing at will. Dairy calves get along better
in calf hutches, similar to large doghouses, than breathing foul air in
a tightly closed barn.

**Q: I read in the paper that research shows how humans exposed to
stress are more likely to come down with the common cold. Is there
similar research that relates to disease in our farm animals?**

**A:** The research may be new, but I'll bet your grandmother also knew,
from experience and observation, that people exposed to worry, poor diet
and lack of sleep were more apt to come down with colds. And you were
correct to suspect that animals suffer right along with us.

Shipping-fever complex in cattle is a classic stress-related disease.
This is primarily a respiratory disease, but diarrhea may complicate the
symptoms. The stress of shipping and the causative organism of shipping
fever must both be present to start the disease, and these organisms -
both viral and bacterial, and in combination - are many. These
disease-causing organisms are present in many environments (sale barns,
stockyards and even in poorly cleaned cattle trucks and trailers, to
name but a few). Once these organisms start to grow in a stressed
animal, they become stronger and will spread to healthy animals in
contact with those infected.

Treated or untreated, shipping fever's mortality rate is often high.
Adequate ventilation and getting animals out into fresh air will cut
down its spread and severity. Prompt veterinary care will lower the
mortality rate. The disease may be carried from herd to herd on people's
boots, clothing, etc. Don't visit other farms or have unnecessary
visitors in your stable during shipping-fever season. You will note that
your veterinarian, inseminator and others who must go from barn to barn
will be especially careful about washing boots and equipment after
treating sick animals and before entering all stables during outbreaks
in a neighborhood. Prevention is possible and very important: In most
situations with small herds, the disease will never be seen if no new
animals are introduced. Preventive inoculations are many and varied.
Your local veterinarian will know what is best for your particular
situation. If you intend either to add animals to your herd or to take
some to shows, or if you hear of a shipping-fever outbreak in your
community, contact your farm vet for advice.

**Q: We have a mare that we wish to breed so that she will foal soon
after January. She's to be sent to a breeding farm in February. Its
veterinarian came and examined her in August and told us to "put her
under lights in December so she will be starting to cycle by the time
she comes to us." What types of horse equipment do we need?**

**A:** It simply means putting a 200-watt bulb in her stall and turning
it on by timer every morning at five and leaving it on for 16 hours. Be
sure the bulb is up out of reach and kept free of dust and combustible
material.

A better way is to turn the mare out every day (except when weather or
ice make it impossible) and time the light in her stall to go off after
there have been 16 hours of natural and artificial light combined. If
she conceives early and is sent back home in March, continue until
natural light is close to 16 hours in May.

**Q: We have a family cow, and when she calved last year we let the calf
nurse two or three times a day, then milked out what the calf didn't
take. It got to be less and less, and when we finally butchered the calf
for veal, the cow dried up in a few weeks. She is due again in a month.
What can we do differently so that we'll have milk for ourselves for
more than four months?**

**A:** The time of day you milk makes no difference, but it should be
the same time each morning and evening and as close to 12 hours apart as
your schedule permits. It could be an extreme of eight hours and 16
hours, just as long as it is always the same. After stimulation (the
calf's mouth on the teats, or you massaging them with warm water), the
cow's letdown period (when the teats fill with milk to be withdrawn) is
no more than six minutes, with peak letdown only two minutes. Last year
the calf got most of the milk. By the time you started, the letdown was
nearly over and you probably couldn't get much. Once the calf was
butchered, the cow, which was used to the stimulation by the calf,
probably didn't respond to your hand.

When your cow calves this year, allow the calf to nurse no more than
once to get a good bellyful of colostrum. Remove the calf (if the barn
is really cold, you could rig a heat lamp over the calf, but be careful
that it is not where the cow can reach it or too close to anything that
could cause a fire), and wait at least six to eight hours to milk the
cow. The calf will be hungry, and the cow will have a full udder. Wash
and massage the cow's teats with 120°F water, dry them and start to milk
within 45 to 60 seconds. Feed the calf from a pail, guiding its mouth
into the milk as it sucks your fingers, or use a nipple-type pail. Four
to six pounds (pints) of milk should be plenty for this first feeding;
gradually increase the amount to 10 pounds or more as the calf develops.
After that, try to milk at 12-hour intervals

The most important factor in good milking and dairy cow health, whether
you're dealing with a family cow by hand or a 2,000-cow dairy by
automatic milking, is never changing routine. You may not have quite as
good a veal calf by pail feeding, but at least you should have milk for
10 months.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71588-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix035.html#a71588-0)

PHOTO: FLICKR/RANDALLVANGURCHOM

A horse reaches for a fresh bite of grass under a layer of winter snow.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter044.html}

::: body
# [Finding And Fixing An Old-Time Fiddle](#toc.html#chap-44) {.chapter-title}

**If you're looking to take up a new hobby, discover how to find an
old-time fiddle and make minor fiddle repairs.**

**By Len Jones**

**December 1991/January 1992**

The moaning, lonesome wail of the old-time country fiddle has graced
American homesteads for centuries, from the peaks of the Blue Ridge to
the Louisiana bayou. It is a wonderful, expressive instrument that you
can have fun teaching yourself to play.

### Finding a Fiddle {.level3}

Now, a super-slick contest fiddler (and there are plenty of contests)
might tell you that it takes an expensive, exceptional instrument to
sound good. That's fine for him, but it doesn't mean much to the man
back in the sticks. In fact, my wife gave me an inexpensive instrument
with a full, resonant tone that's earned me compliments from a classical
violinist! A fullsize (violins come in full, three-quarter and one-half
sizes), high-sided fiddle will generally have the full, foot-stomping
sound most people associate with fiddling, while smaller, more delicate
instruments possess a more "conservative" quality. When searching for
your fiddle, knowing the kind of sound you want really helps.

Just as important as tonal quality is your choice of a bow. Most country
fiddlers "choke up" on a standard-size bow. That is, they ignore
classical discipline and slide their bowing hand way up in order to
master the fast, sweeping licks that country fiddling demands. Although
this is a comfortable enough approach, many fiddlers find themselves
with their hands a full one-third the way up the bow! For this very
reason, many people (myself included) choose to buy a
three-quarter-length bow. These bows alleviate the need to choke up and
are available any place that carries fiddles.

A small cake of rosin rubbed generously along the bow's horsehair is
necessary to get the proper friction and tonal quality. The powdery
white dust from the freshly rosined hair will collect under the strings
of your fiddle and, although it's not absolutely necessary to clean this
resin, many people prefer to keep the necks of their instruments clean.
In old, hard times, many fiddlers allowed the rosin to collect heavily
on the fiddle's neck and recycled it by rubbing the bow hair through the
dust as needed. Rosin was darned hard to come by, and reusing it was a
good, practical idea. Some still adhere to that method, but I keep my
fiddle spotless and waxed since too much resin accumulation will eat up
my varnish.

Other basic necessities include a good bridge that sits level and
straight on the instrument. (Some bluegrass fiddlers even file down the
rounded top in order to make playing double stops - fiddling two strings
at once - a lot easier.) If you're buying a used fiddle, make sure the
tuning pegs fit good and tight and that the neck is unwarped or
"hollowed out" from the firm pressing of fingertips over the years.

Naturally, you'll need a set of decent strings to get a good sound, and
there are a lot of different brands and types. Both gut and steel
strings are available, but due to the easy breakability, short life,
subdued sound and high cost of the gut string, the steel type is far and
away the most popular with country fiddlers. I don't use the little
"mufflers" that come with most strings (they go on top of the bridge,
under each string) because I like a fairly loud, vibrant tone. Select
wisely though: The way you'll sound depends greatly on which equipment
you choose.

### Minor Fiddle Repairs {.level3}

Any regluing, removing of cracked pieces, etc. on the fiddle will
necessitate a trip to your nearest music shop or instrument craftsman,
if you are fortunate enough to know one. When the horsehair on your bow
has broken considerably, you will need to have it rehaired by a skilled
repairman, a job that should cost about \$10. Keeping the hair clean and
just tight enough (not too tight) to get a good tone will save a lot of
stress on your bow. When your tuning pegs begin to slip, you will
probably have to replace them - an inexpensive chore. A broken bridge
will, of course, have to be replaced. Always make sure that the feet of
the bridge rest level on the fiddle body. Strings will occasionally
break no matter what you do, but avoiding excess temperature changes and
tuning them properly (again, not too tight) will greatly extend their
life. Probably the best all-round deterrent against most major repairs
is a sturdy, lined case - it really provides a great amount of
protection.

If you live anywhere in North America, there has to be a fiddlers'
convention or bluegrass festival within a reasonable distance. At a good
festival, you can hear a full day of good music, including some of the
finest professional fiddlers alive, for just a few dollars. What has
amazed me is that when you meet famous bluegrass players who have
probably been playing longer than your lifetime, they are as warm and
humble as your next door neighbor. Many get-togethers will feature
instructional workshops conducted by professionals volunteering their
time and knowledge. The dedication of these traditional musicians is
almost unbelievable.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71590-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix036.html#a71590-0)

ILLUSTRATION: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Teach yourself to play the fiddle, and you can enjoy beautiful music
forever!
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71590-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix036.html#a71590-1)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS
:::
:::

[]{#chapter045.html}

::: body
# [Uncle Billy'S Salt-Cured Hams](#toc.html#chap-45) {.chapter-title}

**Uncle Billy cured ham unlike anyone else, and you can learn how to
make salt-cured ham like Uncle Billy.**

**By Joel Bourne**

**December 1991/January 1992**

My first memory of Uncle Bill Long's ham goes back to a Christmas dinner
long ago. I was a shirttail boy of eight, and my family had been invited
to Uncle Billy's big white farmhouse near Garysburg, N.C. There, among
30 or 40 relatives, we lined up (children first) to cruise the
sideboard, plates in hand and help ourselves to my aunt's Southern
cooking. I remember squash casserole, candied yams, butterbeans and
snaps, and collards boiled hard and long into a wonderful deep green
mush. There was turkey with oyster dressing and cranberry salad, rice
and gravy, and hot rolls for dipping and shoving. The desserts were
nearby: plum pudding and fruitcake, ambrosia and pecan pie, and, of
course, my Aunt June's legendary caramel cake, which had faithful fans
in three countries.

Reigning over the sideboard like King Solomon on his throne was a ham
cured by Uncle Billy. Deep red on the inside, covered with cloves and a
mahogany glaze of molasses and brown sugar on the outside, its aroma
filled the dining room. I remember nearly transparent slices, rimmed
with thin strips of fat, on a white dinner plate. With my mouth watering
and my eyes already feasting, my ears turned deaf to my mother's
warnings not to eat too much because "it would give us children bad
dreams." (After one Christmas ham-eating binge, legend has it that my
cousin Henry awoke among ripped sheets and tossed blankets.) This was
strong stuff, I was told - an acquired, grown-up taste, like okra or
good bourbon.

I ate too much anyway. I still remember taking small forkfuls of the ham
(a taste that can only be described now as dark, hard, mysterious, and
smacking of salt, smoke and spices), carefully lacing it between bits of
soft rolls, and then dousing the whole thing with red-eye gravy. A
native of ham country (smoked hams from places like Gwaltney and
Smithfield have made the area famous), I feel justified to state
unequivocally and with all prejudices firmly in place - that my Uncle
Billy makes the best country ham in the world. A modest man of 64 and a
churchgoer, he would scoff at such praise - but he wouldn't deny it. He
learned it from his mother, Caroline, when he was a boy, and he's been
doing it steadily, almost as a revival, for the last 15 years. And like
all things he cherishes from a simpler time (including his Model A
pickup or his 1935 meat slicer), Uncle Billy's happy to tell you all
about it - just as long as you're happy to listen.

When I went to visit him early this fall, the farm was bustling with
activity. Cousin Duna's wedding was set for the following weekend, and
the whole family of six girls, several husbands, and numerous
grandchildren were working in the yard getting ready for it. I found
Uncle Billy behind the house wiring lights to one of the half-dozen
outbuildings scattered around the place.

### The Secret of Uncle Billy's Homemade Ham {.level3}

"So you want to know about hams," he said, in all seriousness. "Well, I
tell you. The key to keeping good hams...is to keep your smokehouse
locked." He leads the way down a path in the yard, shooing tame ducks
from underfoot, to where two small buildings back up to a soybean field.
He tells me about how, every January when he was a boy, they'd kill 30
to 40 hogs fattened on corn and peanuts to feed the family and the
farmhands. It was the social event of the season, and all the people who
worked and lived on the farm turned out to help. The men did the
butchering, the women took care of the organs and scraps to make
chitlins and sausage, and the children tried not to get in the way.
Nothing was wasted or thrown away, not even the hair, which was saved
for stuffing mattresses or making plaster. "We used to say you used
everything but the squeal," laughs Uncle Billy. These days, however, he
buys fresh "green" hams from a local slaughterhouse.

### In the Salt House: Salt Curing and Preserving Ham {.level3}

We stop in front of the salt house, a cinderblock building with plaster
walls and tables to one side. The door is heavy, thick and insulated. As
with so much else on a farm, says Uncle Billy, the first thing you need
for successful ham-curing is the right weather - a cold snap in January
with temperatures in the high 20s to low 30s at night. He brings the
green hams into the salt house and lays them on the table. Meat cools
just like it cooks, from the outside in, he says, and the meat has to
drop to about 40 degrees Fahrenheit next to the bone, a process that
usually takes overnight. When it's cold, he explains, the fat stays
solid. The next morning he pours a layer of salt on the table and begins
to cover the meat with it, rubbing it in, moving the joints, adding more
salt until it "starts feelin' stiff." For his annual 24 hams, he buys 50
to 100 pounds of salt.

A ham has two sides, the skin side and the fresh-meat side. When he
finishes working the meat, he lays it on the table skin-side down and
covers it with a layer of salt one-half inch to an inch deep. "When it's
blood-red fresh, it has a tremendous amount of moisture," Uncle Billy
says. "The salt is going to penetrate the meat quickly. And don't
forget: The meat will absorb the salt until it reaches equilibrium. The
first few days are critical until the salt gets to the bone. When the
humidity is high, it's ideal. As it penetrates the meat that salt will
disappear like melting snow."

Four things influence the salting process: the thickness of the meat,
the moisture of the meat, the humidity of the air and the temperature.
Because it's tough to control the temperature and humidity, the salt
house was built with thick walls and insulation to trap the cold inside.

After the initial salting, Uncle Billy goes back to the salt house three
or four days later and adds another layer of salt, working the joints
again to help it penetrate. He returns again seven or eight days later
and repeats the process, and then leaves the hams in the salt house for
most of February. He stresses that cold dampness is what you need. If
there are a few bluebird eggs in February, which is not uncommon in
North Carolina, he'll bring several 100-pound blocks of ice into the
salt house to keep the ham cold until the weather returns to normal.

"After four to five weeks, the salt content is stabilized - the same at
the surface as at the center," Uncle Billy says. "Then you have
preserved your meat. You could hang it on the back porch, and it would
be fine all summer."

### In the Smokehouse: Smoking Ham to Enhance the Flavor {.level3}

Salt may preserve a ham, but smoking makes it worth eating. In early
March, Uncle Billy takes the hams from the salt house, fills a metal
washtub with warm water and washes them "just like a baby." He then
mixes borax (found in the detergent section of your local grocer) and
black pepper at a ratio of about a half can of pepper to a 32-ounce box
of detergent, although he won't admit to exact measures. "I just mix it
in till it looks right, like that," he says, showing me the box of soap
flecked with black specks of pepper. It usually takes 10 to 12 boxes of
borax and six cans of pepper. He covers the hams with a thin coat of the
mixture, which toughens the skin to keep bugs out. Next, he takes a can
of crushed red pepper and pours it on the exposed hock until the whole
end of the ham turns red. He repeats the process on the fresh side where
the clavicle blade sticks up through the meat. "That'll keep the
skippers out," he says, referring to the larval stage of a fly, which
can be the bane of a ham's existence. "They'll eat the damn meat up."

Once the ham is thoroughly coated, Uncle Billy pokes a hole in the thick
end with an ice pick, makes a loop of rustproof copper wire, and hangs
it in the smokehouse, hock down.

The smokehouse sits next to the salt house, a square, white clapboard
building of pine siding and cedar shingles, with a pointed red roof that
is as high as the walls are tall. Uncle Billy opens the heavy latch on
the door, and we step inside, enveloped by the darkness and the sharp
smell of smoke and aging meat. He flicks on a bare light bulb, revealing
a concrete floor with a sunken circular fire pit in the middle and a
table to one side. Above us, hanging on hand-turned wooden pegs, a dozen
hams are suspended. Shafts of light beam down through cracks in the
roof. Unlike the salt house, which is built thick and tight, ventilation
is key here.

Three wooden tiers ring the smokehouse rafters. The top tier is for new
meat. Two-year-old hams hang on the second tier, and 3-year-old hams are
on the bottom, so that my Aunt Mildred, who stands about 5 foot 3 inches
tall in her stocking feet, can retrieve them easily with the help of a
long pole made just for that purpose. When the new hams are ready for
smoking, Uncle Billy takes the older hams and stores them temporarily in
the salt house. The new meat goes on the bottom tier, about three feet
overhead.

Good smoking weather, says Uncle Billy, is like good duck-hunting
weather. "I want it to be miserable - damp and cold." But the secret
that distinguishes his cured hams from others is the wood he uses for
smoking. In the summer when he prunes his fruit trees, Uncle Billy saves
all the prunings down to the smallest twig. He has peach and pear trees,
but apple wood is his favorite, and he makes sure he has several
armfuls. He cuts a few extra armloads of young sassafras, which grows
wild along a nearby fence row, and stores it all in a dry place until
March.

The day before he's ready to smoke, Uncle Billy goes into the woods and
fells a hickory sapling as big around as your thigh and cuts it into
one-foot lengths. The next day, at seven in the morning, he starts a
small fire in the fire pit, using newspaper and the fruitwood kindling.
(Any other starter would taint the meat.) He stays with it all day,
adding wood and adjusting the fire until he goes to bed that night.

"Once I get the fire going, I get it hot as hell," he says. "I wait
until it bums down. Then I put the green wood on the fire. That's when
the smoke starts." The idea in smoking is not to cook the meat but to
let the smoke enhance its flavor. If the fat starts to drip, then the
fire is too hot. The smoke is the important thing; that's why the
smokehouse is well ventilated. The ham will be blond when it comes in,
with a clear white skin. Uncle Billy smokes it until it turns a rich
mahogany color. Then his part of the process is over: The rest is up to
the meat and time.

After a few months, the hams often grow a thin patina of mold on the
skin, which Uncle Billy says "suits them just fine. It's a sign of good
moisture and maturity. Aging has got more to do with it than anything I
do. Folks who make liquor will tell you the same thing." Although he has
eaten the milder, 1-year-old hams his children seem to prefer, for Uncle
Billy a ham doesn't reach its full potential until the third year.
"Three-year-old meat gets hard, red, and stringy," he says. "It has a
bite to it. It sure is good eating."

Salt-cured and smoked, the new hams go to the top tier to age. The only
thing left to do is wait and check them periodically for skippers. The
best way to discourage the insects is to keep the smokehouse clean and
dark. Insects, Uncle Billy explains, are attracted to light. So if you
keep it dark, you'll keep it safe. Should the skippers get in anyway,
he'll put his hams in the freezer for a day and scrub the smokehouse
until "it's as clean as a hospital."

"The old generation had all these little things they did," Uncle Billy
says. "Put them together and you never have to worry about chemicals to
keep the bugs out. Like room. If you've got space and room, things seem
to work better. The commercial boys wouldn't think of building this big
a space for a few hams. They can control the humidity and the
temperature. But when you get right down to it, I'll put mine against
theirs any time. The proof of the pudding is in the eating, isn't it?"

### Uncle Billy's Curing Ham Legacy {.level3}

Uncle Billy has never sold a ham, despite receiving many offers to buy
them. The few he has donated to his church's charity auctions have sold
for as much as \$75. This year, however, only the bottom tier is full of
hams. When I ask him about it, he shrugs and kicks the ground with his
boot. "I'll be 65 in February, and I plan to retire. None of these kids
are interested in doing it, so these will be the last of them."

A week later I was at Cousin Duna's wedding reception, standing in line
beside a table packed with food. A woman from up north was in front of
me. She picked up a ham biscuit and took a delicate bite. "Oh, that's
very salty," she said.

"Well," I offered, "it's a bit of an acquired taste."

::: divimage
[![art](images/71592-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix037.html#a71592-0)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Uncle Billy shows off one of his famous salt-cured hams.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71592-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix037.html#a71592-1)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Three wooden tiers ring the smokehosue rafters. The top tier is for new
meat.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71592-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix037.html#a71592-2)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Uncle Billy uses this vintage sliver that "slices meat so thin you can
read through it."
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71592-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix037.html#a71592-3)

 

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Uncle Billy's salt table.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter046.html}

::: body
# [Historical Heirloom Gardening With Ornamental Plants](#toc.html#chap-46) {.chapter-title}

**Heirloom gardening can combine ornamental plants into a variety of
stunning landscape arrangements. Use this historical guide along with
the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} seed and plant finder to create your own
heirloom garden.**

**by Jo Ann Gardner**

**December 1991/January 1992**

In 1970 we moved a Noah's Ark of animals - two horses, two cows,
miscellaneous chickens, cats and a dog - 750 miles northeastward to a
100-acre farm at the end of a dirt road on a remote peninsula in Cape
Breton Island, Nova Scotia. After we had rebuilt the barn, plowed and
planted the fields, restored the fences and established vegetable and
fruit gardens, I turned my attention to the heirloom flowers I'd
inherited with the property: herbs, flowers and shrubs planted on a
knoll just beyond the front door. I found many varieties of ornamental
plants decorating the landscape: There were lilacs, purple and white,
their aging limbs spread over a wide area almost touching one another.
At the base of one, the ground was entirely covered with spotted-leaved
lungwort *(Pulmonariaofficinalis*) - displaying clusters of small pink
and lilac-blue trumpets in the early spring - and nearby was an
impressive clump of tawny daylilies *(Hemerocallis fulva),* once
described as the floral symbol of our gardening past.

Struggling to survive on the same piece of ground were a few mock orange
bushes and a group of daffodils - known locally as the French lily or
white lily - most of whose buds never opened and later expired still in
their papery covering. The few flowers I saw, though, were
unforgettable: tight clusters of intensely fragrant, double-white
blooms.

A rosebush sprawled in front of the house, just under a window, its
suckers spreading in every direction. I knew virtually nothing about old
roses then, but I later learned this was a 'Banshee', also known as the
'Loyalist Rose', common at Colonial sites all over the Northeast. When
the flowers opened, I discovered old rose essence for the first time,
deep within the layers of blush pink petals.

Yellow flag iris (*Irispseudacorus) -* with swordlike green leaves and
small fleurs-de-lis blossoms in a classic design I'd never seen before -
flourished in a large colony by the back door. In fact, I'd never seen
the likes of any of these plants, having grown up in the suburbs and
spent my gardening time hoeing rows of beans to feed our family. This
small collection of ornamental plants opened up a new world to me. I was
attracted to the plants' pronounced scents, variety of forms somewhat on
the wild side and charming, often quirky ways.

These plants, I thought, with their simple grace and charm, were close
to the wild, unspoiled by human intervention. But as I became more
involved with the subject of old ornamental plants, I realized that
curious gardeners have been tinkering with nature for centuries, and
that the subject was much broader and more complex than I had imagined.

I've come to understand that what constitutes an heirloom ornamental is
open to interpretation. Heirlooms change over time and are not fixed
absolutely. They do, however, represent valued possessions at different
periods in history. Those plants that deserve our attention as heirloom
gardeners can be as varied as the truly antique 16th century
double-flowered dame's-rocket, as well as hybrid creations that are
deserving of attention. These unique blooms are becoming increasingly
rare, and are in danger of being lost to future generations of
gardeners - the 1950s rose known as 'Ma Perkins' comes to mind.

Just as my earlier experiences helped shape my idea of heirlooms, my
expanded knowledge contributed to a new vision, aptly summed up in
author Edward Hyams's description of worthy lilies: "easy, tolerant,
robust and enduring." This is the vision that stands behind the wide
selection of plants I have chosen to describe. I hope that those just
becoming interested in the subject of heirloom ornamental plants can
experience their diversity as I have, and make informed choices about
what to grow and which aspects of heirloom plants to explore in depth. I
believe that qualities such as easy, tolerant, robust and enduring are
virtues in which many gardeners are interested. I also feel these values
are most in tune with the kinds of gardens they want to create:
informal, low-maintenance, attractive landscapes in harmony with the
surrounding environment. As I have learned, the plants that fit that
description include the silver-leaved lungwort, tending to itself under
the filtered shade of my old lilac tree, the broad border of colorful
hybrid dahlias that thrive at the edge of my neighbor's potato patch,
and the 1942 'Blue Shimmer' iris, an indestructible bearded type that I
acquired in the 1970s and have moved more times than I care to remember.

If one of the greatest pleasures of gardening is sharing, then how much
greater is that pleasure when the sharing includes such a rich world of
interesting and varied plants, our collective valued possessions.

## A Few Definitions of Heirloom Plants {.level2}

The definition of heirloom ornamental plants, for our purposes, is as
follows: plants introduced to American gardens from 1600 to 1950 (and a
little beyond to accommodate the iris and other plants defined as
"antique" if they have been introduced in the past 30 years). This is a
diverse group of herbs, flowers, shrubs and vines, native flora and
plants from around the world. It is broken down into two categories: (1)
Ancient and antique types (the terms are almost synonymous, with ancient
suggesting older), known and described as early as classical times. The
plants in this group include many very hardy, nearly wild types that we
associate with English cottage gardens. (2) Middle-aged types, hybrid
variations on ancient and antique themes that began to appear in great
numbers as the result of expanded knowledge about plant breeding toward
the end of the 19th century.

Strictly speaking, hybrids are the result of cross-fertilization between
two plant species, sometimes occurring naturally but usually on purpose.
The horticulturalist uses the term more loosely to apply to any
cross-fertilization between variant parents, such as the thousands of
gladioli and irises created by crossing and recrossing cultivars. A
cultivar, or variety, is any plant that arises from cultivation and is
significant enough to name, as distinct from naturally occurring
variations. You've probably heard the term open-pollinated (OP to the
initiated). This means that the blossoms from those plants have been
pollinated "in the open" by nature. Plants from any of the groups I have
described are variously referred to as "antique" or "old-fashioned."

If you've grown only tamed types in your garden, you might want to
become familiar with easily naturalized wild (OP) species, which, as I
show, constitute a large and varied group of garden-worthy plants. If
you've grown only the latest hybrid tea rose, a whole world of antique,
old roses awaits you. If you're interested in edible landscapes,
heirloom plants supply plenty of material for making delicious and
useful products - from salt substitutes to jellies to homemade
detergent.

Plunging into heirloom gardening will be enjoyable as well as easy if
you follow these suggested plantings, which have been organized into
historical groupings: You can explore super-hardy and open-pollinated
plants typical of an early settler's cottage garden, as well as the
tender vine-covered arbors and hybrid roses, daffodils and lilies of
later periods. It is most important for gardeners to have a rough
familiarity with Latin names because common names, while charming, are
unreliable for identification, and you may want to know the precise name
of the plant you admire so that you can order it from a plant or seed
source. Where I live, several different plants are known as 'London
Pride', but none is the lovely little saxifrage (*Saxifraga urnbrosa)*
that most people associate with Gertrude Jekyll's cherished 'London
Pride'. Common names are more than charming, they are part of our plant
heritage, the stored wisdom and wit of countless generations of ordinary
gardeners. They preserve interesting bits of history and often refer to
a plant's outstanding physical characteristics in memorable images. Hurt
sickle, for instance, describes the way a mower's sickle was often
caught in the wiry stems of *Centaurea cyanus* as it mingled with grain
in the fields of Europe. Today we know this plant mainly by its
Victorian name - bachelor's button - from its use as a boutonniere.

Growing zones can be difficult to ascertain since authorities do not
always agree. Figures are based on the [U.S. Department of Agriculture's
(USDA) Hardiness Zone
Map](http://www.usna.usda.gov/Hardzone/ushzmap.html). As experienced
gardeners know, you can push these limits by planting in microclimates
(protected sites where extra moisture, protection from the wind,
exposure to sun, and so on, are provided), depending on the requirements
of the situation.

Use the [[MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Plant and Seed
Finder](http://www.motherearthnews.com/Find-Seeds-Plants.aspx) to search
for the heirloom seeds and plant varieties you are looking for.

## Planning and Preserving the Heirloom Garden {.level2}

*"The love of flowers brings surely with it the love of all the green
world."*

-Francis King *(The Well-Considered Garden, 1915)*

The subject of heirloom plants is broad enough to include the nearly
wild open-pollinated flowers and herbs of old English cottage gardens
and early American gardens, as well as the relatively new hybrid forms
that poured forth in great numbers around the end of the 19th century.
If your tastes run to the former category and you think hybrids have no
place in the heirloom garden, you can choose from a wide variety of
plants introduced from the 17th to the 19th centuries in America, among
them many wonderful native plants. I have organized the following
groupings historically so that you may choose to plant those types that
most satisfy the varied meanings of heirloom. For the eclectic gardener
interested in beautiful and deserving plants from any era, I have
included a wide-open garden with plants from all periods.

## An Early Settler's Cottage Garden: 1600-1699 {.level2}

It is surprising how many ornamental plants turn up on lists of those
grown in the 17th century, especially since we have been told so often
about the Puritan gardens of utility. I rather think that these gardens,
like most of those planted since the beginning of horticulture, were
"compounded of both dreams and utility." How else can we explain the
appearance of lilies-of-the-valley, sweet William, Canterbury bells,
dame's-rocket, lilacs and mock orange, whose herbal virtues are almost
nonexistent? However, as might be expected, these gardens are
characterized by sturdy, reliable plants that are adaptable and hardy,
able to survive in a variety of habitats and almost all from the Old
World (with the exception of the native Canada lily (*Lilium
canadense),* wild bergamot *(Monarda fistulosa)* and the flamboyant
scarlet honeysuckle *(Lonicera sempervirens)).*

If you're just becoming interested in herbs, a settler's herb garden is
a good way to start since these plants are easy to grow and have many
uses that speak to us today. All love the sun and can be grouped by the
kitchen door within easy reach: chives for chopping into salads,
southernwood sprigs for adding to potpourri or sachets, pebbly-leaved
sage for flavoring, wild bergamot for tea, calendula petals for
decorating cakes, at least one 'Old Garden' rose for rose-petal jelly.
Train a hop, honeysuckle or an everlasting pea-vine on an old-fashioned
quiggly fence (instructions to build at end of article). This structure
can also support tall, single-flowered hollyhock and a variety of
settler plants we value primarily for their good looks: bellflowers,
feverfew, the bright red Jerusalem cross, the soft pink musk mallow
(don't be afraid to pair them), the exquisite pearly florentine iris,
and the flower-laden spikes of the white or Madonna lily *(Lilium
candidum),* and the pastel clusters of dame's-rocket, both to perfume
the early evening air. Sow dark blue bachelor's buttons among these and
add a double-flowered peony or two on the other side of the doorway.
Before you know it, you will have the proverbial cottage garden.

You can carpet the ground beneath nearby lilacs and mock orange with
spotted-leaved lungwort, to be followed by plants that appreciate the
partial shade and moist ground they provide: lilies-of-the-valley, sweet
cicely, columbine, daylilies, Canada lilies and little Johnny-jump-ups.
All of these plants will thrive with very little attention. You can
choose from the plants listed below to create your own settler's cottage
garden.

**Perennials (Hardy to Zone 3)**

chives (*Allium schoenoprasum*), columbine, single and double
(*Aquilegia vulgaris*), cowslip (*Primula veris*), florentine iris
(*Iris x germanica Florentina*), garden sage (*Salvia officinalis*),
grandma's poeny (*Paeonia officinalis*), Jerusalem cross (*Lichnis
chalcedonica*), lemon lily (*Hemerocallis lilioasphodelus*),
lily-of-the-valley (*Canvallaria majalis*), lungwort (*Pulmonari
officinalis*), Madonna lily (*Lilium candidum*), monkshood (*Acunetum
napellus*), musk mallow (*Malva moschanta*), peach-leaved bellflower,
single and double (*Campanula persicifolia*), southernwood (*Artemisia
abrotanum*), tawny daylily (*Hemerocallis fulva*), wild bergamot
(*Monarda fistulosa*)

**Biennials and Short-Lived Perennials**

Canterbury bells, single and double (*campanula medium*), clary sage
(*Salvia sclarera*), dame's-rocket (*Hesperis matronalis*), feverfew,
single and double (*Chrysanthemum parthenium*), hollyhock (*Alcea
rosea*)

**Hardy Annuals**

bachelor's button (*Centaurea cyanus*), calendula (*Calendula
officinalis*), Johnny-jump-up (*Viola tricolor*)

**Shrubs (Hardy to Zone 3)**

lilac (*Syringa vlgaris*), mock orange (*Philadelphus coronarius*)

**Perennial Vines (Twining, Hardy to Zone 3)**

everlasting pea (*Lathyrus latifolius*, nearly evergreen in the South),
hop vine (*Humulus lupulus*), scarlet honeysuckle (*Lonicera
sempervirens*, evergreen in the South)

## An Old-Fashioned Mix of Ornamental Plants: 1800-1900 {.level2}

The term "old-fashioned" conjures up different images: a rustic,
vine-covered arbor or a bleeding heart, laden with dangling rosy hearts.
Both fit the description of 19th-century plants: tender annuals from the
tropics (morning glories and nasturtiums) and sturdy perennials from the
Orient. This period offers great scope, for the heirloom gardener can
become acquainted with early hybrids - lush-flowered bourbon and hybrid
perpetual roses, whose generous, untailored forms evoke the past,
blooming almost the entire summer rather than all at once like the
ancient Old Garden roses.

These are mixed plantings, a far step from the early settler's cottage
garden of dreams and utility; they are also a bridge to the new world of
hybrids, where art and science combine to produce new forms never before
known, such as the large-flowered Jackman clematis, introduced in 1860
and still popular. Here you can also find the increasingly rare open
pollinated essential petunia, a little sweet-scented pure white or dark
purple velvet trumpet. This period offers a fine introduction to the
whole concept of heirloom, saving the best from the period prior to the
modem era.

A child's rustic arbor (see design at end of article) can be clothed in
morning glories, moonflowers, and sweet pea and scarlet runner bean
vines: all quick-growing plants. Around three sides - leaving room for
an entrance path - plant a colorful annual border for all-season bloom
from early summer into the fall: cosmos, double-flowered balsam,
nicotiana, Shirley poppies or corn poppies, petunias and marigolds
(single French and dwarf signets). This is certain to be a popular place
for children in summer. Even if you have only a little room, several of
these can be planted in containers. The heirloom nasturtium 'Empress of
India', for instance, is gorgeous in a hanging basket, with its
cascading orange-red spurred flowers. The seldomly grown fern-scented
signets, a mound of orange or yellow, blooms until frost (and even
beyond if sheltered), fit into the landscape almost anywhere.

If you think hostas are boring, this is the opportunity to learn more
about them. The types here were introduced from the Far East before the
end of the 19th century. Try them in filtered shade (a good place for
bleeding heart, too), and group them for contrast of foliage - broad and
glossy, undulating, narrow or variegated. Most hostas sport attractive,
and sometimes quite fragrant, flowers. These plants, when given the
right accommodations - moist and cool - will spread out and look as if
they mean to stay a long time. The spectacular wild goldband lily and,
from the Orient, the showy Japanese lily - flowering with large, waxy
white, recurved pendant blooms - will do best among shrubbery,
especially rhododendron, which also enjoy rich, humusy soil that is
heavily mulched.

Plant hybrid roses on a sunny bank and edge them generously with furry
gray, drought resistant mats of lamb's ears inter-planted with the
indispensable sweet alyssum, a border that will take care of itself all
season. For a hardy perennial vine to climb up a tree (use chicken
wire), 'Jackman' clematis puts on a good show all summer, but all of the
vines below have proven their worth. To cover the side of an old shed,
there is no better vine than the sweet autumn clematis.

The following are suggested plants for the old-fashioned mix:

**Perennials (Hardy to Zone 3 or 4 except where noted)**

bleeding heart (*Dicentra spectabilis*); daffodils (Hardy bulbs):
'Angel's Tears' (*Narcissus triandus albus*; inquire about zone if
nursery-propagated), 'Hop-Petticoat' (*N. bulbucodium conspicuous*, Zone
6, inquire about zone if nursery-propagated), 'Old Plesant's -Eye' (*N.
poeticus recurvus*); Hostas: blue plantain lily (*Hosta ventricosa*)
fortune's plaintain lily (*H. fortunei hyacynthina*), fragrant plaintain
lily ('August' or 'Corfu' lily, *H. plantaginea*), siebold plantain lily
(*H. sieboldiana*); Lilies: goldband lily (*Lilium auratum*), showy
Japanese lily (*L. speciosum*), balsam (*Impatiens balsamina*); cosmos
(*Cosmos bipinatus*), marigolds (*Tagetes patula* and *T. tenuifolia*),
moonflower (*Ipomea alba*, quick-growing twining vine), nasturiums
(*Tropaedom majus*, flower and quick-growing twining vine), nicotiana
(*Nicotiana alata*), petunia (*Petunia hybrida*); scarlet runner bean
and white runner bean (*Phaseolus coccineus* and *P.coccineus Albus*,
quickgrowing twining vine); Shirley or corn poppy (*Popover rhoeas*);
sweet pea (*Odoratus*, twining vine); sweet alyssum (*Lobularia
maritima*).

**Shrubs**

roses, bourbon: 'Louise Odier' (Zone 6), 'Mme. Isaac Pereire' (Zone 6);
roses, hybrid perpetual: 'Baronne Prevost' (Zone 5), 'Frau Karl
Druschki' (Zone 5); roses, rugosa: 'Blanc Double de Coubert' (Zone 3 or
4), 'Roseraie de I'Hay' (Zone 3 or 4)

**Vines (Hardy to Zone 3 or 4, twine like grapes, need horizontal
support)**

clematis: anemone celmatis (*Clematis montana rubens*), 'Elsa Spath
Jackman' (*C: x jackmanii*), 'Lord Neville', 'Nell Moser', sweet autumn
clemantis (*C. paniculata*)

## A Garden of Native Flowers: 1700-1850 {.level2}

The period from the 18th century through the early- to mid-19th century
was characterized by a slow but growing awareness of our native plant
treasures. Through the efforts of people like John Bartram - farmer,
plant collector and curious gardener extraordinaire - who established
his own plant nursery in 1728, Americans for the first time had a
commercial source for a variety of native plants, especially shrubs.
Bartram, for instance, was responsible for introducing mountain laurel
and the Catawba rhododendron (considered to be among our finest native
shrubs). In the early 19th century, Bernard McMahon introduced some of
the plants discovered during the 1803 Lewis and Clark Expedition -
flowering currants (golden and clove), for instance. Thomas Jefferson
grew many of these native shrubs at his home in Monticello.

If you're interested in native flowers, an heirloom garden is an
excellent starting point, as well as a good introduction to growing
shrubs in general. While some of these plants are quite specific in
their growth requirements - preferring sun or shade, moist or dry soil -
all are easy to grow once these conditions have been met. They are
especially recommended for low-maintenance gardens that complement and
blend in with their natural surroundings. Since many of these plants are
fragrant, you will also have an attractive habitat for birds and
butterflies.

For a garden in partial shade with moist, humusy soil, choose among
several native rhododendrons and azaleas (the former have nearly
evergreen leaves, the latter deciduous ones that turn bronze or scarlet
in the fall). Under-plant them with native wildflowers such as Virginia
bluebells, scarlet bee balm (really brilliant in partial shade), and
bleeding heart *(Dicentra eximia* and *D. formosa).* Among them plant
maidenhair ferns for all-season dainty green foliage.

Shrubs that will grow almost anywhere, resisting both drought and damp
conditions, include the flowering golden and clove currants *(Ribes
aureum* and *R. odoratum,* respectively), mountain laurel, and highbush
cranberry (this will give you creamy white flower clusters in early
summer and bright red berries and foliage in the fall). If planted in
full sun, mountain laurel will reward you with masses of cup-shaped
white flowers in late spring or early summer, but its handsome glossy
leaves remain green all season and will provide a background for such
sun-loving plants as American columbine *(Aquilegia canadensis),*
butterfly weed, black-eyed Susan, the yellow-whorled horsemint *(Monarda
punctata)* and the bright orange-red leopard lily *(Lilium pardalinum).*

A sunny rock garden should include low-growing moss phlox - little blue
flowers with drought-resistant, needle-like green foliage - spilling
over and between the rocks; rhodora, a diminutive rhododendron with
rose-colored flowers and attractive foliage; and crested iris, just
three to four inches high, a mass of violet and gold in the spring. All
of these could be followed by the colorful drummond phlox for a long
season of bloom.

In that damp spot in the sun where nothing else will grow, you can plant
the wild blue flag iris (combine it with the European yellow flag iris).
The native elderberry is adaptable to damp as well as dry soil, and its
thinly branched form won't block out the sun. At its feet you may
encourage a colony of the magnificent Turk's cap lily (*Lilium
superbum*), which is bright orange and heavily spotted. "A plant of so
much beauty," Thomas Jefferson declared, "will be a valuable addition to
our flower gardens."

If you're looking for an easy-to-grow vine for damp conditions, try
American virgin's bower - a woody, twining vine that can be trained over
an arbor, where it will produce masses of small white flowers in the
spring, followed by unusual, fluffy fruits in the fall. You can
establish a ground cover at its feet with two fine 18th-century
introductions "from away\": the azure blue lungwort (*Pulmonaria
angustifolia*) and variegated goutweed. If you also let the
old-fashioned bouncing Bet grow in a wide mat as it likes to do, its
pink flowers will perfume the air in the early evening. Forget-me-nots
should be added to any planting where the soil is moist, either in sun
or shade. The Virginia creeper not only can be trained up the side of a
building (it's a clinging vine), but when grown over an arbor, its side
shoots will trail downward, creating a graceful effect anytime and a
dramatic effect in the autumn, when its foliage turns scarlet red.

Choose from among these native plants those best suited to your area's
growing conditions:

**Perennials (Hardy to Zone 3 or 4 except where noted)**

American columbine (*Aguilegia canadensis*), bee balm (*Monarda didyma*)
blue flag iris (two species; one, *Iris virginica*, is hardy to Zone 7,)
butterfly weed (*Asclepias tuberosa*), crested iris (*Iris cristata*),
horsemint (*Monarda punctata*, Zone 6*),* leopard lily (*Lilium
pardalinum*), lupine (*Lupinus polyphyllus*), maidenhair fern (*Adiantum
pedatum*), moss phlox *(Phlox subulata*), Turk's cap lily (*Lilium
superbum*; bulb hardy to Zone 5), wild bleeding heart (*Dicentra eximia*
and *D. Formosa*)

**Biennial or Short-Lived Perennial**

black-eyed Susan (*Rudbeckia hirta*)

**Annuals**

clarkia (*Pulchella* and *G. Unguiculata*), drummond phlox *(Phlox
drummondii*), godetia (*Clarkia amoena*)

**Shrubs (Hardy to Zone 3 or 4 except where noted)**

catawba rhododendron (*Rhododendron catawbiense album),* clove and
golden currants (*Gibes odoratum* and *R. aureum*, respectively),
elderberry (*Sambucus canadensis*), flame azalea *(Rhododendron
calendulaceum,* Zone 5), highbush cranberry (*Viburnum trilobum*),
mountain laurel (*Kalmia latifolia*,) Oregon holly grape (*Mahonia
aquiforum*, Zone 5), pink-shell azalea (*Rhododendron vaseyi*), rosebay
rhododendron (*Rhododendron maximum*), swamp azalea *(Rhododendron
viscosum),* winter currant (*Gibes sanguineum*, Zone 6*)*

**Perennial Vines (Hardy to Zone 3 or 4)**

American virgin's bower (*Clematis virginiana*), Virginia creeper
(*Parthenocissus quinquefolia)*

## The Eclectic Garden: 1600-1950 on {.level2}

This is the place to put it all together - cottage garden herbs and
flowers on the wild side with 'New Dawn', the 1930 hybrid climbing rose,
which puts forth clusters of blush pink flowers all summer. The eclectic
garden is also the place to explore the diverse world of heirloom
gladiolus, daffodils, irises and lilies (so defined if they were
introduced more than 30 years ago). These have endured in the
marketplace or in the hearts of gardeners because of their superior
qualities: adaptability, beauty and an undefinable essence that elevates
them to the status of legend. Did you ever think a gladiola could fall
into this category? Many enthusiasts feel that way about 'Picardy', a
1931 creation with soft pink blooms that has vanished from the
marketplace, but is perhaps still growing in a garden somewhere. Some
heirloom gardeners feel as strongly about preserving 'Amigo', a 1938
bearded iris with extraordinary pansy coloring and generous form, as
others feel about preserving 18th century 'Laced Pinks'. There is room
in the eclectic garden for the simple, unadorned beauty of the wild
cowslip (*Primula veris*) and Jan de Graaf's 1947 'Enchantment' lily, an
introduction that set the standard for hybrid lilies: reliable,
free-flowering and disease-resistant. Wherever they are planted,
ancient, antique and middle-aged heirlooms enjoy and thrive in each
other's company.

In full sun, plant early settlers' flowers and herbs such as musk
mallow, bellflower, sweet william, Jerusalem cross, dame's-rocket, sweet
cicely, sage and the indispensable Oriental poppy, fortified by the
mountain bluet to help prop up its sprawling stems. Also add Mr.
Russell's late1930s luscious hybrid lupines in every shade you can get,
the tall spires of foxglove and the sunny daisy-like golden marguerite
(through which the gray-green sage foliage will appear to advantage).
Among these sow tall, white nicotiana and cosmos, dark blue bachelor's
buttons, and annual poppies and calendula. To this generous all-season
border, add bearded irises (all sizes and colors), vintage
large-flowered gladiolus - grouped together near the middle of the
border, where just their blooms will be exposed - and an heirloom lily
or two. The fragrant regal lily, with large white trumpets, is a good
substitute for the white or Madonna lily.

Did you know that there are wild gladiolus for naturalizing, some so
hardy that you need not dig up their corms in the fall? These can be
grown with wild sweet flag iris, which have fragrant lavender-blue
flowers and striped foliage. In the rock garden, add 'Little Witch', a
1929 cyclamineus daffodil (only eight inches high) with yellow
flared-back petals, and 'Louisa', a lovely variation on the
narrow-leaved plaintain lily, with its narrow, white-edged leaves and
white flowers. In partial shade, plant the first pink-apricot trumpeted
daffodil, 'Mrs. R.O. Backhouse', with Virginia bluebells.

In that damp ground where nothing else will grow, establish the Siberian
iris to naturalize with ancient and native yellow and blue flag irises.

Of course, you must have roses - for making hedges, arbors, adding to
the shrubbery and even planting in containers. Investigate the
middle-aged classics, such as 'Buff Beauty', a 1939 hybrid musk shrub
with a strong fragrance and an equable disposition, producing gold cream
flowers all summer long, even in drought conditions. The ever-blooming
polyantha ('The Fairy'), with masses of light pink double blossoms that
last all summer, will make a low hedge or even a container plant. For a
bushy hedge, grow 'Betty Prior', which has bright, single-petaled pink
blooms all summer and is spectacular when massed. As for 'Blaze', tie it
to a post for full vertical bloom and train it along a fence (pegging
down the long, supple canes) or over an arbor, where it will provide a
fitting entrance to the eclectic garden.

**Perennials (Hardy to Zone 3 or 4 except where noted)**

daffodils: 'Beersheba', 'Little Witch', 'Mrs. R.O. Backhouse', 'Silver
Chimes' (Zone 6), 'Thalia'; foxglove (Digitalis purpurea); gladiolus
(for naturalizing): colville gladiolus (*Gladioli x colvillei albus*,
Zone 7); hardy gladiolus (*G. byzaritinus*, Zone 4); hybrid gladiolus
(treat as annuals): 'Dawn Glow', 'Glacier', 'Peter Pears'; golden
marguerite (*Anthemis tinctoria*); hosta: 'Louisa'; iris, bearded:
'Amigo', 'Black Forest', 'Blue Denim', 'Honorabile', 'Wabash'; iris,
Siberian (*Iris sibirica*): 'Eric the Red', 'Helen Astor', 'White
Swirl'; sweet iris (*Iris pallida*, Zone 5); regal lily (*Lilium
regale*); lupines ('Russell' hybrids); mountain bluet (*Centaurea
montana*); Oriental poppy (*Popover orientale*)

**Roses (shrus, ramblers and climbers used as vines; Hardy to Zone 5
except where noted)**

'Betty Prior', 'Blaze', 'Buff Beauty', 'Crimson Glory', 'Paul's Scarlet
Climber', 'The Fairy' (Zone 4,) 'Therese Bugnet' (Zone 4)

## Additional Information and Ideas for Your Heirloom Garden {.level2}

**Child's Arbor Instructions**

To make this charming centerpiece, you will need half a dozen freshly
cut saplings (alder, willow, or birch are good), 2" thick at the butt
and 12' long. Leave the twigs on. Mark a circle with a 6' diameter on
the ground. Sharpen the saplings' butts. Thrust two saplings into the
ground opposite each other, at six and 12 o'clock, and arch them over
each other, leaving enough room to walk underneath. Tie the saplings
together securely with inconspicuous twine or wire at two or three
places where they overlap on both sides. Do the same with two more
saplings at two and eight o'clock, then with two more at four and 10
o'clock. Plant quick-growing annual vines all around the base of the
arbor, except at the low entranceway. See drawing in image gallery.

**Quiggly Fence Instructions**

Build a three-rail fence by driving treated 6' posts 18" into the ground
as far apart as the length of the fence. If the fence is longer than 12
feet, drive a post in the middle. Nail rails (use treated wood or peeled
hardwood saplings) across the posts at 18 inches, 36 inches and 54
inches. See drawing in image gallery.

Weave young, unpeeled, fresh-cut saplings (black spruce or larch is
best), no bigger around than 2", vertically through the rails (behind
the bottom rail, in front of the middle one, and behind the top rail).
Every other sapling should be woven in reverse (in front of the bottom,
behind the middle, and in front of the top). Space the saplings an inch
or two apart. You may cut them at a uniform height of 7' or 8' or vary
them for a more natural effect, This type of fence also acts as an
effective windbreak.

**Plant Categories**

Pernnials: Live for more than three years.

Short-lived perennials: Need to be replaced every few years.

Biennials: Take two seasons to flower from seed; may self-seed from year
to year.

Annuals: Tender annuals are damaged by frost; hardy annuals are
frost-hardy in varying degrees and often self-sow from year to year.

Bulbs: Hardy bulbs (such as lilies and narcissi) are perennials. They
are left in the ground from year to year except in warm-winter areas,
where they may need to be grown as annuals and prechilled. Tender bulbs
(such as dahlias) are usually treated as annuals, except where winters
are mild and they can be left in the ground from year to year.

Vines: Twining (such as the scarlet runner bean), tendril (such as sweet
pea and clematis; it climbs by tendril-like leaves), and clinging (such
as the Virginia creeper). The first two types need support, such as a
fence, post, wire, or trellis; the last type will climb on its own if
planted close to a wall or tree trunk. If not given any support, most
vines make a good ground cover. Although roses aren't vines, those with
long enough canes (six feet or over) can be so treated if given means of
support\--that is, trained along fences or arbors.

## Find Sources for Heirloom Seeds and Plants {.level2}

Search more than 150 online seed catalogs to find sources for organic,
heirloom or just hard-to-find seeds using MOTHER's [Custom Seed and
Plant Finde](http://www.motherearthnews.com/Find-Seeds-Plants.aspx)r.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71594-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix038.html#a71594-0)

PHOTO: iSTOCK/JORGEANTONIO

Picket fences and sidewalk borders are ideal locations for varying the
color arrangement of old roses and purple sage (*Salvia officinalis*).
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71594-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix038.html#a71594-1)

iSTOCK PHOTO/ JAKECZ

Tawny daylilies (*Hemerocallis fulva*) in the early settler's cottage
garden.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71594-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix038.html#a71594-2)

iSTOCK/DEETONE

A cottage garden with a beautiful border of heirloom roses, daylilies
and other colorful blooms.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71594-3.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix038.html#a71594-3)

iSTOCK PHOTO/WINGMAR

Siberian iris (*Iris sibirica*) in the ecclectic garden, combining
heirloom and hybrid varieties.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71594-4.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix038.html#a71594-4)

ILLUSTRATION: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

A child's arbor can be a fun, and stunning, addition to your heirloom
garden.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71594-5.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix038.html#a71594-5)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

This quiggly fence follows a design similar to one traditionally built
in early settler's cottage gardens.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter047.html}

::: body
# [Axe Sharpening And Maintenance](#toc.html#chap-47) {.chapter-title}

**Proper axe sharpening makes cutting jobs easier.**

**By Robert E. Hetchler**

**December 1991/January 1992**

To most people, an axeee is very basic: It's a stick with a sharp piece
of metal on one end that'll chop just about whatever you put it up
against. And as with any tool made to do a cutting job, proper use and
sharpening will save a great amount of time and effort. Sharpening a new
or badly abused axeee should be done in three stages. First, check the
axeee to assess its condition. Second, grind the blade down. And third,
file the blade and the blade's edge. axe sharpening is both easy and
necessary.

Assessing the condition of your axe begins when you pick it up. Take a
close look at the handle. Look good? Make sure yours is solid and sturdy
with no noticeable crack lines running through the wood. Many accidents
as well as unfinished jobs have been caused by cracked or split handles.

Once your axe handle passes muster, inspect the cutting edge. It should
flow in a clean smooth sweep from top to bottom without waviness or
minor nicks. Nicks do happen but can be removed with several
sharpenings. For cutting, the angle from the edge onto the face of the
axe blade must be very flat and should extend well back. A short, abrupt
angle and a thick blade are great for splitting firewood.

axe grinding is the easiest and quickest way to remove excess metal. But
the key words for axe sharpening are slow and careful. "Slow" because a
grinder can remove metal from the wrong place or even the right place in
a hurry. And "careful" because any power tool must be treated carefully.
A grinder can and will remove any object from the firmest grip and
deposit it in unfunny places.

The cutting edge should face the direction the wheel is turning. Work
the stone across the blade without stopping while it is in contact with
the metal. Don't let heat buildup get out of hand - heat can take
hardness and strength away from steel. Try to grind as smooth as
possible. When the grinding is finished, the filing starts. Filing is
done to smooth the grinder marks, flatten the high spots and ridges and
create the cutting edge. The file used should be flat and of a
reasonable size. A file handle will make the job safer. Care should be
taken since the axe will rapidly become sharp enough to cause a major
cut. (For safety, the axe should be clamped or held in a comfortable
position.) The file should be worked only on the cutting side of the
teeth. Dragging the file backward dulls the cutting action quickly. The
long, flat surface of the file can be used to create a long, flat
surface from the cutting edge onto the blade of the axe. Used from this
direction, the file will create a clean, flat surface and can also shape
the cutting edge. The sharp edge will bite deeper into the wood if it's
followed and supported by this smooth, flat angle. The sharpness of the
edge can be judged by looking at it. When viewed directly from the edge,
the sides will taper smoothly into nothing. A small, shiny line down the
middle means the fine edge is worn away and the axe is no longer as
sharp as it could be. Carefully file one side, then the other, until a
very thin, flaky edge appears. A few final, very light strokes will
clean this away and result in an extremely sharp axe.

A dull or ill-prepared axe can glance from the wood and cause a broken
handle - or worse, an injury. A properly sharpened axe will dig in and
cut deep. Because of this, safety must always be on one's mind. Plan
each axe stroke and backstroke. Never stand or place anything that
should not be cut in the area of the path the axe could take. Sharp is
as sharp does, and a sharp axe is a cutting tool that will do the job.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71596-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix039.html#a71596-0)

PHOTO: ISTOCKPHOTO/SVLUMAGRAPHICA

Be sure to take safety precautions when sharpening and using an axe.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter048.html}

::: body
# [Winter Mulching](#toc.html#chap-48) {.chapter-title}

**How to apply winter mulch to your perennial fruits.**

**By Stu Campbell**

**December 1991/January 1992**

By now, with any luck, your rhododendrons and azaleas are safely nestled
under a layer of winter mulch made up of pine needles (or wood chips or
sawdust or whatever), your roses are snug under their protective cones
and are now mere drifts under a blanket of snow, and your bulbs have
been tucked away before the first hard frost.

Now is the time to turn your attention to perennial fruits. There has
been much controversy and confusion over the winter mulching of these
plants. Some say that a garden should be left naked and exposed for the
winter. Authors John and Helen Philbrick have written, "Mulch should not
be left on over the winter because it prevents the beneficial action of
the frost in the earth. Moisture should not be hindered from 'coming and
going' during seasons of snow and ice. If protective mulch is in such a
condition that it will break down during the winter and become part of
the topsoil, it may be left. But the home gardener should study this
subject carefully and be sure he knows exactly what he is doing and why
he is doing it."

I have made a study of this - a cursory one, at least. I asked the
question, "Why does Mother Nature arrange to have her trees drop their
leaves, and then see to it that a heavy blanket of snow insulates the
ground even more? Is winter mulching, then, a bad thing?" I have
concluded that your garden, particularly your perennials, should have
winter mulch. But there is no rush to put it there.

Vermonters laugh unsympathetically at "down-country" people who bundle
up under many layers of winter clothing in a futile effort to keep the
cold out and keep their own body warmth in.

Winter mulch acts in the same way, except that it keeps winter soil
frozen - even during thaws. Winter moisture and frost should be allowed
to penetrate the soil before applying mulch. Then, if the mulch keeps
the frost in, the plants cannot be "heaved" out of the ground when the
soil expands and contracts on alternately freezing and thawing days.

Winter mulch protects perennial foliage from drying winds and too-bright
winter sunshine. It prevents the absorption of heat in the spring and
won't allow a thing to grow until after the last killing frost, when it
is finally removed.

Last point of debate: How much winter mulch is enough? I suppose it's
possible to smother plants under too much winter mulch. One approach to
the problem might be to find out the average frost depth in your area
from your local bureau of the National Weather Service. Then roughly
estimate how deep your plants' roots are. Once you know this, you might
find that Dr. D.E. Pfeiffer provides a clue. He says, "Winter mulch does
the same thing that snow does: It insulates the soil to the same depth
as the height of the mulch. If there is a 3-foot snowfall, the effect of
the snow reaches down to a depth of three feet. A mulch acts in the same
way." This doesn't mean that you have to mulch to a level equivalent to
the bottom of the frost level. That would mean as much as 4 feet of
mulch in Vermont! It only means that you should mulch to a height that
is a little greater than your perennial plants' roots are deep - that
is, if the frost level where you live goes below that point.

All that said, here are some suggestions for applying mulch to some of
the most commonly raised backyard fruits.

**How to apply winter mulch with strawberries.** Winter mulching is
essential to successful strawberry growing. It not only prevents
heaving, which breaks roots, but protects the vulnerable crown of each
plant, which is in real danger in temperatures below 10 degrees
Fahrenheit. The plants should be protected by several inches of mulch
whenever temperatures stay below 20 degrees for any extended period of
time. In this part of the country, that would be somewhere between
Thanksgiving and the middle of December.

Don't mulch your strawberry plants before that - early mulching can do
more harm than not mulching at all. Covering your plants too soon will
block sunlight from the leaves and halt photosynthesis. This will
prevent the plants from producing and storing enough carbohydrates to
get through the winter.

Straw is generally the mulch of choice for winter protection. If you use
one of the organic mulches, uncover the plants in late spring, when the
new growth is about 2 inches long. Again, don't be overanxious. An early
spring frost can nip off uncovered strawberry flowers, and you'll end up
with fewer berries. As you remove the mulch, put half of it in the
pathways between rows and leave the other half for the plants to grow
through.

**How to apply winter mulch with raspberries and blackberries.**
Although mulching is not necessary for either, it will improve yields
and lessen cold injury. It's important, however, not to over-mulch. New
growth may not be able to push through a thick layer.

You can mulch raspberries and blackberries almost immediately after
planting. I use chopped hay or leaves or a combination of the two.
Sawdust, wood chips, shavings, dried chopped cornstalks and poultry
litter can also be tried. Apply 3 or 4 inches to the row or over the
entire soil surface. Be alert for nitrogen deficiencies.

**How to apply winter mulch with blueberries.** Mulching blueberries can
be a tricky thing. Some argue that they should not be mulched at all
unless there is good soil drainage. Overmulching can make blueberries
more susceptible to disease. Other authorities admit that blueberries
are apt to ripen later if they are mulched, but claim that higher yield
is the end result.

Sawdust and chopped cornstalks are excellent mulches for blueberries.
This resurrects the old myth about sawdust mulch "souring" the soil.
Sawdust actually tends to influence the soil pH very little in most
cases. But even if it were to make the soil more acidic, this would not
hurt the blueberries. They seem to do best in a soil with a pH of 4.5 to
5.0, so they should never need lime. This means they can stand a
permanent mulch of anywhere from 4 to 6 inches of pine needles, peat
moss, oak leaves, beech leaves, or any other mulch that releases acid
seepage. Black plastic, neither sweet nor sour, also works well on
blueberries.

**A word on mulching vegetables.** Don't forget those vegetables that
rely on a hearty winter mulch to make it through the cold months.

**How to apply winter mulch with asparagus.** If you're just starting a
new asparagus bed, mulching probably isn't necessary at all until the
second spring - but if you live in a cold place like Vermont or
Minnesota, you'll want to mulch for winter protection even in the first
year. Hay, leaves, straw, old manure and compost are just a few mulches
that are excellent for winter protection of asparagus.

As you know, once a bed has established itself, it will continue to
produce asparagus for many years. In the spring, there is no need to
remove winter mulch. The tips will come up through the mulch whenever
they are ready. 8 inches of hay is not too much for asparagus. Its
primary function is weed control, but there may be other fringe
benefits.

**How to apply winter mulch with carrots.** Have you tried leaving your
carrots in the ground during the early winter months? They can be kept
there, covered with a heavy mulch of some kind to prevent freezing and
thawing damage. Once dug up, these winter carrots won't keep long, but
they're certainly preferable to the frozen or canned stuff.

**How to apply winter mulch with kale.** Kale is an incredibly hardy
vegetable. It can be grown nearly any time of year. A fall or winter
crop may be left in the field, covered lightly with something like hay,
pea or cranberry vines, or straw. Later in the winter, remove the snow
(one of the mulches kale seems to like best, by the way) and cut the
leaves as you want them. Kale will sometimes keep this way all winter,
if it doesn't get smothered by ice after a thaw.

*Editor's note: Stu Campbell is the author of* The Mulch Book: A
Complete Guide for Gardeners, *from which this article is adapted.*

::: divimage
[![art](images/71598-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix040.html#a71598-0)

 

PHOTO: DAVID CAVAGNARO

Cold-weather mulching protects perennials in much the same way as a
heavy blanket of snow insulates the ground in winter.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter049.html}

::: body
# [How To Make A Natural Garland For The Holidays](#toc.html#chap-49) {.chapter-title}

**A natural garland can dress up a doorway, mantle or tabletop during
the holiday season.**

**By Susi Jacobson**

**December 1991/January 1992**

In the first weeks of december, as I start bringing boxes of Christmas
decorations down from the attic, I also begin thinking of what I can
make to add to the holiday feel in my home. Along with traditional
greens and a pinecone wreath, a natural garland is at the top of my
list. A nice backdrop for decorations collected over the years, a
garland smells terrific, is extremely versatile and long-lasting and
gives a wonderful old-fashioned Christmas look to any home.

I used to decorate the doors, windows and hallways of my house with long
single strands of undecorated pine. After a few years, I still liked the
look of it, but became intrigued with creating something a little
wilder, a little richer looking - a piece that would catch the eye with
some color. What I didn't realize at the time was how versatile a
natural garland would be for all my holiday decorating needs.

If you're anything like me, more items come out of boxes each day as the
Christmas season progresses, and arrangements change over the weeks,
either to accommodate space or just to let a decoration take a new spot
for a while. A natural garland is very adaptable for these ongoing
changes: One 6-foot garland can start as an over-the-door piece, then
move to the mantel or be used lengthwise down a door front. And for a
Christmas brunch, it makes a lovely centerpiece. The following
instructions for one 6-foot natural garland can be used to make larger
or smaller ones - simply double or halve the amount of the supplies on
the list below.

Foraging for many of the materials you'll need is a fine way to get out
in the winter air and exercise a bit. (If you don't have some item - or
if you didn't save some of the drieds from autumn - then purchase them
at a crafts store and remind yourself to collect them next fall.) You'll
be surprised at how much material you can actually gather in the wintry
woods and fields around your home.

Although the supplies listed for this garland may also vary slightly
depending on where you live, the basic assembly of the garland remains
the same. I'm simply giving you my choice of materials and some
alternatives. And while it may turn out differently from what you're
used to, the smell will be so intoxicating and the look so Christmasy,
you won't be able to pass it by.

The first place to gather, of course, is in the pine grove. (Make sure
you wear work gloves and take hand clippers and one or two large
buckets.) When I cut, I look for scattered branches so that I won't
leave a tree looking like someone has just hacked it up.

Clip branches about 2 feet in length and place in your buckets. While
you're out in the woods, pick up some hemlock pinecones, hickory nuts
and shells or any other nut or small cone you might find. As you exit
the woods, check the roadside for teasels.

When you've picked all you need, take your pine buckets back indoors and
fill them with enough water to cover several inches of the cut ends.
Soak them overnight to allow the greens to absorb as much moisture as
possible so they'll last all season long.

Next, take the nuts and cones home and dry them on a tray in a warm
place. Hang-dry the teasels.

Now it's time to unpack the Queen Anne's lace you've dried over the
summer along with the old-fashioned red rose-hips and dried white
hydrangeas. Red celosia, lamb's ears and red and white globe amaranth,
which you can grow in your garden and dry, will make striking accents.
For those of you living in the South, eucalyptus or Spanish moss should
be easy to find. For us Northerners, crafts stores carry both. Pick up a
spool of wreath wire while you're there, too.

If you enjoy a touch of sparkle in your creations, spray-painting the
hydrangeas, teasels, bay leaves or yarrow gold or silver is a clever
alternative. This is easily done by sticking the flower stems in a piece
of Styrofoam and then spraying them from all sides. Bay leaves can be
sprayed on one side, dried, then turned to spray on the other side.

With all your supplies gathered, you're ready to start assembling. If
your Christmas spirit is a little slow in coming this year, constructing
a garland will most certainly turn your feelings around. Smelling the
greens, working with all the unique naturals and enjoying how well your
garland is turning out really injects the spirit of Christmas.

Creating decorations with friends is a marvelous way to share and get
new ideas. So put on some Christmas music, heat up some potpourri
(another marvelous use for some of the natural dried ingredients listed
here) and let your creative spirits flow.

## Natural Christmas Garland {.level2}

Supplies needed: (Alternative materials in parentheses)

-   *2 large bunches of dried artemisia*
-   *6 large branches of fresh white cedar (arborvitae, boxwood)*
-   *6 large branches of fresh white pine (balsam)*
-   *6 dried yellow yarrow flower heads*
-   *6 dried yellow yarrow flower heads spray painted barn red*
-   *3 ounces of Spanish moss (sphagnum moss)*
-   *12 dried lambs ears (bay leaves, holly leaves)*
-   *30 dried Queen Anne's lace flowers (yarrow, baby's breath)*
-   *30 dried red celowia (any red dried)*
-   *30 dried rosehips (holly berries, canella berries)*
-   *6 dried hydrangea blossoms (German statice, baby's breath)*
-   *63-inch pieces of green eucalyptus*
-   *10 white globe amaranth flowers (dried)*
-   *10 red globe amaranth flowers (dried) (rosebuds, strawflowers)*
-   *10 hickory shells (any nuts or shells)*
-   *6 dried teasels (milkweed pods, goldenrod galls)*
-   *12 small pinecones*
-   *Clippers*
-   *Scissors*
-   *Baling twine*
-   *Small roll of wreath wire*
-   *Hot-glue gun and glue sticks*
-   *Barn red spray paint*
-   *Clear acrylic spray*

### Instructions: {.level3}

Makes one 6-foot garland

\
1. Cut three 7-foot pieces of baling twine. (Your garland will end up
being 6 feet in length - the 7-foot twine allows for knots in the ends
and for your twine shrinking a bit during braiding.) Knot all three
pieces together at one end.

2\. Find a hook or a nail in your wall to hang the twine knot from. Then
braid the three pieces of twine until you get to the end. Tie a knot in
the end. Trim excess twine off both knots and remove from the nail.

3\. Take the Spanish moss and stretch the mass evenly the entire length
of your braided twine. Place the braid in the middle, on top of the
moss. A foot at a time, take your glue gun and apply glue to the front
and back of the twine and hold the moss on for a minute. (Careful, watch
that you don't get a bum from the glue while doing this - you may want
to use gloves.) Continue gluing until the whole length of twine is
covered. Now you have a firm base on which to attach your greens. (If
you used one piece of twine and no moss, your garland will twirl in a
circle when you go to hang it.)

4\. Gather your artemisia, white cedar and white pine. (Just bring the
buckets of greens to the table where you're working and pull out as
needed, patting dry to keep water off other materials.) Starting with
the artemisia, cut three 4-inch pieces off the ends of the bunch and
wrap once around tightly with a 7-inch piece of wreath wire. You should
have two long ends sticking out of either side.

You will need 35 each of these bunches of artemisia, white cedar and
white pine to cover your garland base. You may either wrap all bunches
in the beginning or wrap each one as you go along - it's your choice.

5\. With some or all bunches wired, place a white cedar bunch over one
end of the moss braid and wrap two wire ends tightly around the braid
until all the wire is wound. Make sure you wrap as tightly as possible
or your bunches will swing loose: You're working toward a firm, neat
garland. Then take a wired artemisia bunch, place it one-quarter inch
past the first wired cedar bunch, fan slightly to the right and attach.
Take a white pine bunch, fan it slightly to the left and attach the wire
a little past the artemisia. (You'll soon get a good gauge of how much
space to leave between bunches; too much distance between bunches and
you'll notice gaps.) All bunches should be facing the same direction.

6\. Continue wiring bunches, alternating the artemisia, white cedar and
white pine until you reach the end of the garland. (You may feel as if
you'll never finish but I usually end up being pleasantly surprised by
how quickly the winding goes).

7\. At the end, wire one bunch over the knot, working in the opposite
direction you've been going in up till now - this should make both ends
of your garland look the same.

8\. Find that nail you used for braiding and hang your garland from one
end. Stand back and check for any holes or places you might want to trim
back a little. Holes are easily filled by taking a piece of green,
gluing the end, sticking it into the hole and making sure it's secure to
the braid.

9\. Now it's time to glue on your flowers, nuts and berries. The easiest
way to do this is to remember that your garland is six 1-foot sections.
Your aim is space out your drieds in six equidistant groups. To do this,
lay your garland out the length of your table. Starting with the red,
place all six yarrow heads evenly right alongside your garland; then
take your lamb's ears and place two by each yarrow piece; next, the
Queen Anne's lace, then the rosehips, until all your accent pieces are
distributed in the six groupings.

10\. Now, working with your first group of drieds, carefully arrange
your yarrow, hydrangea and lamb's ears within the first foot section of
your garland, using all the drieds for that section.

After the flowers are arranged to your liking, glue the 1-foot section
of drieds in place, making sure that the stems of larger items (yarrow,
teasels) get glued to the base.

11\. Create the same arrangement five more times down the garland and
glue each section. Now stand back and take a good look at your work.
Your eyes should travel easily down the garland with equal spacing and
repetition of design. If you catch a hole or a missing color, just make
corrections until the garland looks full.

12\. Spray dried flowers, nuts and berries with a clear acrylic spray
for added shine and moisture protection.

After you've finished decorating your garland, it's time to decide which
way you're going to use it. To hang, make a small loop on the back of
the braid with wreath wire and use a sturdy nail.

When it's time to store, place the garland carefully in a box and tuck
tissue paper all around. You may have to replace some of the drieds next
year, but any loose items can be fixed with a glue gun quite easily. The
fresh greens should keep just fine as long as you remember to use
long-lasting ones like white pine, white cedar, arborvitae, balsam or
boxwood. Beware of hemlock and spruce, as they tend to dry out quickly.

And remember, if by February it's time for the garlands to be replaced
by other decorations, think about your front porch. Hung vertically,
just next to the door (as long as it's not in direct rain or wind), it
adds a great touch.

Editors note: Susi Jacobson has foraged, created, and sold her natural
designs for eight years in Munster, PA, alongside woodcarver Tom McCarty
and their daughter Holly.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71600-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix041.html#a71600-0)

 

PHOTO: GEORGIA O'BRIEN

A close-up of a completed section of holiday garland.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71600-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix041.html#a71600-1)

 

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

Tying the bundled drieds onto the base, spacing out the bunches before
gluing and fastening the goodies in place with a glue gun.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter050.html}

::: body
# [Make Your Own Potpourri For Luscious Homemade Christmas Gifts](#toc.html#chap-50) {.chapter-title}

**Unique homemade Christmas presents are easy, sensual and fun when you
make your own potpourri.**

**By [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**December 1991/January 1992**

It's beginning to smell a lot like Christmas. Close your eyes and
imagine for a minute the unforgettable, heartwarming smells of
Christmas: pine trees, bayberry candles, cinnamon cookies, clove
pomanders and bowls of apples and oranges. This is also the time of year
when stores stock many varieties of potpourri - a dried mixture of
scented flowers, herbs and spices - but I find the price outrageous! So
why not make your own homemade Christmas potpourri to put all around the
house or give as a gift? It's easier than you think and a fun activity
for everyone to enjoy. (Children can help with almost every step, and
you can get a break from those endless cookie-making sessions.) A few
walks in the woods, a dip into the stash of preserved flowers and other
materials you may have dried over the summer, plus some fruit rinds,
spices and oils, and you're on your way to having the fun of creating
your own potpourri.

## Homemade Potpourri: Start by Foraging {.level2}

No two homemade potpourris are exactly alike (the word itself means
mixture or collection). The one you create will definitely be your own
original mix, depending on what you can forage in your area of the
country. On the supply list which follows, I've listed the ingredients I
use for my Christmas potpourri, but check within the parentheses for
alternative choices. But don't stop there: If something else appeals to
you, by all means be creative and try it.

All year long, before I start creating my own mix for the holidays, I
check out the potpourri for sale in stores and catalogs to see what
appeals to me and what new things I might want to try. Lots of
commercial potpourris are made entirely of wood chips and one large pine
cone and, in my opinion, look faded in color and have little aroma. If
you can't smell the potpourri through the packaging, I wouldn't
recommend purchasing it.

I start gathering the ingredients for my holiday potpourri at the end of
November. This assures my having plenty on hand all December to scent my
home and create gifts. I never limit myself just to what smells good,
though. Color and texture are equally important to making potpourri look
rich, interesting and eye-catching. Greens, reds, a touch of white and
woodsy browns in different hues and textures give lots of visual appeal
to your mixture, along with the terrific scent.

A brisk woods walk for some winter foraging is a good starting point for
this project. Remember to take several plastic bags, a large basket with
a handle and some hand clippers. Warm work gloves, too, are helpful for
grabbing hold of frosty branches. Start first with some white cedar or
arborvitae - two or three branches of each will do.

Then move on to the hemlock grove for some of its tiny pine cones. If
you don't find them on the tree, they may have fallen off already. Look
under the tree; if the cones are wet from being on the ground, take them
home to dry in a moderate oven until they open.

Next, check stream banks and old logs for a sheet of sphagnum moss. Old
logs are also a good place to find small pieces of fungus that are
easily pulled off. While there, check for some thin bark on beech trees,
which looks interesting shredded in potpourri. If you're lucky,
squirrels may have left a couple of nuts from a hickory tree; nab those
as well. Finally, check around for a holly bush - what's Christmas
without holly, after all? When you get home, spread your goods out on
cookie sheets and let them dry for two or three days in a toasty corner
of your home.

Be sure to cut your white cedar and arborvitae into small pieces, as it
will dry more quickly this way. And while you're at it, this is a good
time to take several oranges and lemons, remove the peels, and tear them
into small pieces; they can dry right alongside everything else. It's
very important to dry all the ingredients completely, as any moisture
left in your mixture can cause spoiling or a bad aroma.

If you've dried and stored away any flowers, berries or nuts over the
summer, you may be able to use some now. Dried red celosia, rose petals,
gladiolus, Queen Anne's lace, rose hips, Hawthorne berries and white
globe amaranth will all be great for your homemade Christmas potpourri.
If you don't have stick cinnamon, bay leaves and whole cloves in your
spice cabinet, they can be purchased at most any grocery store.

The final touch to your holiday mixture will be your essential oils and
a fixative. The oils will give a delicious scent to the potpourri, and
the fixative allows the scent to last months longer. I usually use
orrisroot powder as my fixative, but gum benzoin is one other
alternative. Most crafts stores carry both of these supplies, but I
order mine from [Nichols Garden
Nursery](http://www.nicholsgardennursery.com/store/index.php?CZSESSID=ee681dd408e23b51781eee94d18714b9).
When buying, keep in mind that your initial oils and fixative purchases
should last you quite a while.

Now that you have all your ingredients, start mixing...

## Christmas Potpourri Recipe to Make Two Quarts {.level2}

**Supplies Needed (check parentheses for alternative ingredients):**

-   *20 small pieces of white cedar and arborvitae (white pine, hemlock,
    or balsam)*
-   *40 hemlock pine cones (or any other small pine cone)*
-   *1 16-by-6-inchsheet of dried sphagnum moss, torn into small pieces
    (bun moss, Spanish moss)*
-   *10 strips of dried tree bark or wood chips*
-   *20 hickory nuts (acorns, beechnuts or any other nuts or shells)*
-   *20 small pieces of fungus (or wasp's nest pieces)*
-   *10 pieces of dried red celosia (any other dried red flowers)*
-   *1 ½ cups dried lemon balm leaves (woodruff, mint, rosemary)*
-   *15 dried red gladiolus blossoms (red rose petals, red dried
    zinnias)*
-   *25 dried Queen Anne's lace (hydrangeas, baby's breath, yarrows)*
-   *40 dried rose hips*
-   *40 dried Hawthorne berries (dried cranberries, canella berries,
    holly berries, bittersweet berries orjuniper berries)*
-   *30 dried white globe amaranth*
-   *1 cup dried orange and lemon peel, combined (dried apple bits)*
-   *6 sticks of cinnamon*
-   *10 whole bay leaves (magnolia leaves, beech leaves)*
-   *2 tablespoons of whole cloves (whole allspice, star anise)*
-   *5 drops of bayberry oil*
-   *5 drops of orange oil*
-   *5 drops of cinnamon oil*
-   *5 drops of clove oil*
-   *2 tablespoons of orrisroot powder*
-   *2-quart plastic, glass or tin container with tight lid*
-   *Wooden mixing spoon*
-   *Eyedropper*
-   *Measuring cup and measuring spoons*
-   *(All utensils and containers should be used exclusively for making
    potpourri).*

**Instructions:**

1\. Make sure all materials to be used in your potpourri are dried
completely. This is very important to the final product.

2\. Taking one ingredient at a time, start filling a 2-quart container.
Use all your supplies except the orrisroot and essential oils - you'll
be mixing and storing your potpourri in the same container. After I've
added four items, I usually mix them gently with a wooden spoon to
distribute them evenly, and make the mix look more attractive. I then
add four more, mix again, and so on, until all the ingredients are used.

3\. Now it's time to add your fixative and oils. Remove half of your
potpourri mixture and place it in another dish. To scent the batch more
evenly, add your oils and fixative to half of the batch at a time.

4\. Take 1 tablespoon of orrisroot powder and sprinkle it evenly over
the half of the batch in your container. Then add 2 ½ drops of each oil,
distributing evenly.

5\. Using a wooden spoon, mix the scented potpourri gently to blend the
oils and fizative thoroughly. It should start to smell really good!

6\. Now pour the half you reserved back into the container on top of the
scented half. Add 1 tablespoon of orrisroot powder and 2 ½ drops of each
of the oils.

7\. Mix the top of the batch thoroughly, then mix the entire batch
together.

8\. Place a tight-fitting lid on your potpourri container.

9\. Store potpourri while it is aging in a dry, dark area for three to
four weeks. During this time, open occasionally, stir gently several
times and add more essentials oils if you desire a stronger smell.

10\. After two or three weeks, place your Christmas potpourri in jars,
bowls or colorful sachets, or heat a pan of water on your stove and add
1 cup of potpourri to give your home a heavenly holiday scent. Potpourri
crockpots are handy to scent all rooms of the house, too.

## Homemade Christmas Gifts Using Potpourri {.level2}

It's a good idea to start your own homemade Christmas potpourri in early
December, but my "mellowing batch" hardly makes it through the three to
four week waiting period without me stealing a handful to heat on the
stove or to arrange in a dish on the kitchen table to help me get into
the Christmas spirit. You should, however, allow your mixture to mellow.
You probably noticed when you mixed your potpourri that it smelled
rather strong - the three to four weeks allows for that aroma to soften
a bit.

Please take note that my recipe is for a 2-quart batch, enough for four
medium-size open bowls or 15 to 20 small sachets. Simply double or
triple the recipe if more is desired.

As you're getting your Christmas list together, plan to make extra
sachets or jars filled with potpourri - they make wonderful gifts for
unexpected guests. A large wooden bowl with a lace hanky or napkin
draped inside filled to the brim with your luscious mixture makes a
thoughtful gift, sure to be displayed and appreciated long after the
holidays pass. When giving an open bowl of potpourri, just cover with
plastic wrap and then gift wrap as usual.

Potpourri in sachets can last a year or more, while closed jars that are
opened for occasional scenting will last longer. To revive an open bowl
of potpourri (mine starts to fade around July), just add a tablespoon of
fixative and three or four drops of your oils and stir gently. If you
find something you want to add to your mixture, dry it thoroughly and
just toss it into the batch.

A real treat, though, is simmering potpourri on your stove after a day
of Christmas shopping or during decorating time. I also keep some on
hand for when unexpected guests drop by: Not only do I have something to
give them as they hit the door, but the great smell is so inviting that
it doesn't matter so much what the house looks like!

Just as important to producing an old-fashioned holiday atmosphere as
decorating the tree, hanging stockings and garland, baking lots of
goodies and wrapping gifts, filling your home with bowls of colorful and
aromatic homemade Christmas potpourri can become a tradition you whole
family looks forward to.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71602-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix042.html#a71602-0)

 

MOTHER EARTH NEWS editors

Spices, foraged plants and essential oils mixed into potpourri and
wrapped in sachets make unique, homemade Christmas gifts.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter051.html}

::: body
# [Have A Green Christmas: Live Christmas Trees](#toc.html#chap-51) {.chapter-title}

**Have a green Christmas celebration with a live Christmas tree that you
can replant after the holidays.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} editors**

**December 1991/January 1992**

It always seems like such a shame to throw out the lovely tree that
meant so much to you during the holidays. But sometime after the Super
Bowl and before Valentine's Day, your once spruced-up spruce inevitably
must hit the curb before the last dried-up needle hits the floor. To
celebrate a green Christmas, you can start by purchasing a live
Christmas tree that you can replant after the holiday season.

Live Christmas trees - ones with their roots intact in a burlap-wrapped
ball of earth - not only remain beautiful throughout the season, unlike
cut trees which tend to dry out rapidly, but can be replanted once
they've decked your halls instead of becoming tree waste. By replanting
Christmas trees, you not only have a permanent, living reminder of
Christmas past, you also get the benefit of improving the value of your
property, establishing a new windbreak, providing some welcome summer
shade and eliminating tree waste.

Transplanting success starts at the tree lot or nursery. Most tree
experts agree that fir, spruce and pine are all good candidates for
post-holiday planting. Actually, almost any variety of tree - as long as
its roots are wrapped in burlap - will adapt well to transplantation,
except hemlocks. When choosing the actual tree, look for a healthy
specimen with long, full branches and a large earth ball that's not
frozen. While live Christmas trees can be more expensive than cut trees,
remember that you're getting something that will last a lifetime instead
of just a few weeks.

Once you get your Christmas conifer home, you'll need to "break-in" your
tree by leaving it in a cool, slightly damp area - such as a garage or
basement - for three or four days to lessen the shock of the transition
from outdoors to in. During this interim, keep the root ball covered
with straw, peat moss or an old blanket.

When you're ready to carry the tree indoors, stand it in a large tub and
pack sawdust, peat moss or even shredded newspapers around the trunk to
help hold it upright. An old cloth draped over the earth ball will help
the roots retain moisture. To hide the tub and its contents, simply
drape a decorative tree skirt over and around it. Most horticulturists
advise that you keep your living decoration in the house for only a week
to 10 days - certainly no more than two weeks. Try to place it near a
window and away from warm, dry air escaping from heating vents,
fireplaces and woodstoves.

Most of the plant's roots will be close to the top of the earth ball, so
be sure to keep that area moist at all times: An average-size tree will
require about one quart of water daily while it's indoors. Decorate your
living Christmas tree the same as you would a cut tree, but go easy on
the electric lights - heat from even the tiniest bulbs will tend to dry
out a conifer's needles.

## Replanting Christmas Trees {.level2}

When you're ready to transplant your tree, it's a good idea to give it
another transitional stay in the garage. Find a site for replanting far
enough from buildings and other trees to allow for future growth. To
transplant, dig a hole about one and a half times larger than the root
mass, and gently lower the sapling into place. (If your area has early
freezes, you may have to dig the hole before the holidays, store the
dirt indoors and fill the hole with straw until planting time.) Next,
remove the nails from the burlap bag, and loosen the cloth to give the
tree's roots a chance to breathe. Fill the hole with a portion of the
dirt that was removed, and use the remaining soil to shape a small mound
around the edge of the hole. Then dig a 2-inch-wide ditch just inside
that dike. Finally, mulch the tree with straw, and give your tree its
first watering by filling the "moat" three times.

If your live Christmas tree is carefully planted and cared for, you can
expect it to begin an annual tradition that will continue to beautify
your land for years to come and serve as a happy reminder of past
holiday celebrations. Who knew a green Christmas could be a year-round
celebration?

###  {.level3}

## Recycling Christmas Trees {.level2}

If you didn't buy a live Christmas tree this year, or if it doesn't
sound like the right choice for you, there are several creative ways of
recycling Christmas trees. One option is to take your tree - and any
extras you might have collected from the neighbors - and stack them into
corners of fields to make a home for quail, pheasants and rabbits. You
can also create a special New Year's Eve bonfire with a large collection
of Christmas trees. Alternately, you can tie a couple of rocks to each
evergreen and drop it into a pond. If your pond is frozen over, drag the
tree out to a strategic spot on the ice and leave it for the first
thaw.) Small fish appreciate a little brush on the bottom of a farm
pond: It gives them a chance to hide from the bigger fish - and maybe
grow into big fish themselves!

::: divimage
[![art](images/71604-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix043.html#a71604-0)

PHOTO: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Living Christmas trees are not only beautiful while decorating your
house, but you can replant your tree for year-round enjoyment.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter052.html}

::: body
# [Kid-Approved Earth-Friendly Toys](#toc.html#chap-52) {.chapter-title}

**These earth-friendly toys prove that kids can have fun while they
learn about conservation.**

**By Mary Karenou**

**December/January 1991**

*Note: This article was originally published in 1991, and the products
and resources mentioned may not still be in existence.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

About this time of year, the handier of us on staff cut out of work an
hour or two early and head home to our workshops to put the finishing
touches on a doll house or a wagon. I'm usually halfway through a desk
or a dresser for my daughter (which I typically finish at 2 a.m. on
Christmas morning, sometime after I've hung the stockings by the chimney
with care).

This year, however, is different. My daughter wants "real toys."

After a few frightening visions danced in my head (mutated action
figures, bleeping/zapping/zooming video-game heroes, etc.), I bravely
ventured forth. And here, fellow parents, is the good news: There are
toys out there that are in keeping with your values and your kids' idea
of fun - and that can be delivered to you by tree time.

Wishful thinking, you say? Well, not one to leave such a serious sheep
to chance, I called in the pros. Last month, kids from MOTHER's extended
family played games, read stories and pushed trucks. The results? A
kid-tested treasure chest of toys that will provide hours of fun and
learning about conservation and saving our planet.

## Frolic's Dance {.level2}

This combination story/tape/stuffed rabbit almost caused a brawl when it
was time for the children to choose a toy to take home. Frolic is a
snowshoe hare (13 inches long, snow white, fluffy, soft and snuggly,
with wide feet indicative of his name) who learns friendship and
self-discovery as well as the dangers and delights of the Arctic north.
All the children loved Frolic and his story - he really is cute (I don't
use that word freely). Kids can learn about endangered species, the
animals of the Arctic and friendship. It's suitable for a variety of
ages, from the wee-est ones to those who can read stories to themselves.
The tape, book and rabbit can be ordered separately, but the combo is
\$41.95 from the Smithsonian Wild Heritage Collections through
Soundprints Corporation. The Soundprints catalog features many tales of
endangered species, and children's books on topics such as the rain
forest.

## Save the World {.level2}

The Save the World game is designed to involve the entire family in
vital ecological issues: the ozone layer, endangered species, the great
forests of the world and our oceans, rivers and lakes. Each player
guides a colorful "endangered species" playing piece across a beautiful
"world board," answering questions along the way about ecological
issues. The first player to collect the correct number of "environment
tokens" - the keys to developing a more ecologically balanced world - is
the winner. The rules are easy and our kids had fun playing - and
practically whipping the adults. For two to six players ages 9 and up,
from Crown & Andrews/USA. Available at stores around the country for
about \$20.

## Eco-Blocks {.level2}

Extruded from 100-percent post-consumer recycled high-density
polyethylene (recycled milk cartons), these blocks have the look and
feel of real wood. But unlike traditional wood blocks, no trees are cut,
and they're waterproof, warp-proof, crackproof, nontoxic and can be
cleaned with soap and water. Best of all, no splinters! The kids found
the shapes and colors fun and thought these were "better than the
'regular' blocks because they save trees." Available in nine shapes and
three colors. The blocks range in price from \$1 to \$5 a piece, all the
way up to \$59 for a 28-piece starter set.

## Holgate's Recycling Truck {.level2}

Fire engines and army trucks are a thing of the past. As one
six-year-old put it, "I like my fire truck, but this is like the truck
that comes to our house to take away what we used to throw out." Well
put: Playing with this truck reinforces what kids see happening around
them. It comes with two peg people and three barrels for sorting various
recyclable materials. The 9-inch truck has a removable roof and is safe
for ages 2 and up. Available at toy stores for about \$23. Comes with a
lifetime guarantee.

## Save the Forest {.level2}

Children as young as five can learn about ecology with Save the Forest.
Follow the path through the forest, finding animals, collecting litter
and scoring points. Lots of activity for players, including collecting
puzzle pieces to form animated forest scenes. A fun game that teaches
kids to respect nature. For two to four players. Order from The
Developing Child for \$16.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71606-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix044.html#a71606-0)

PHOTO: MIRANDA PENN TURIN

Eloise, 4, takes recycling into her own hands with Holgate's Recycling
Truck.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter053.html}

::: body
# [Turn Meat Scraps Into Christmas Candles](#toc.html#chap-53) {.chapter-title}

**For an easy Christmas gift, try making homemade candles out of meat
tallow.**

**By the [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small} Editors**

**December/January 1991**

It just wouldn't seem like Christmas without candles. And with good
reason: Candles have long symbolized the anticipation of the holidays
and the keeping of the faith. Candles also remind us that this is a time
to remember the past, and what better way than to forgo electricity in
favor of the beauty of a homemade candle. And, perhaps best of all,
candles make a quick, thoughtful gift (it only takes a second to wrap up
a few!).

In addition to being fun, candles are very easy to make at home. You
don't need an expensive kit, fancy molds or even special wicks. You can
still make them the way your great-grandmother did - with what you have
on hand. Though almost any kind of tallow may be used for candles, beef
tallow is the hardest and slowest burning, with an attractive, creamy
white color and a clean odor. It's also the cheapest and easiest to
obtain - often available free at your local butcher or rendering plant.
Just ask if you can have the beef scraps and be willing to pick them up
at their convenience.

For supplies, you'll need:

**A container** for melting scraps into tallow. You'll need one large
enough to hold a batch and heavy enough to keep it from burning. A
kettle with a pouring spout is handy, and a double-boiler arrangement
for the pots is essential for safety. A large, restaurant-size tin can
bent on one side to form a spout and placed in a large, deep pan with an
inch or two of water is one good, cheap solution.

**Cheesecloth** for straining.\
**A long-handled spoon,** long enough to reach the bottom of the
container. Metal ones are best.\
**Molds** are available in your kitchen or at the town dump.\
**Wicks** can be made of cotton string, cord or whatever you have on
hand.

1.  The first step is to make the wick. Twist or braid together any kind
    of cotton, string or cord to make a wick thick enough for the
    candle. Then soak in one of the following:\
    •2 ounces borax, 1 ounce chloride of lime, 1 ounce chloride of
    ammonia and 1 ounce saltpeter, dissolved in 3 quarts of water.\
    •1/2 pound lime and 2 ounces saltpeter dissolved in 1 gallon of
    water.\
    •Turpentine Soak wicks 15 to 20 minutes; then dry in the sunshine
    before using.
2.  Render the scraps into tallow by cutting them into small pieces and
    melting them in a large, heavy pan on the kitchen stove or outdoors
    over an open fire. Keep the heat low and be patient. If you have a
    large panful, it may take several hours. Stir once in a while. When
    the bits of fried fat float to the top of the melted tallow, strain
    them through a piece of cheesecloth. Now you're ready to mold or dip
    your candles.
3.  You have two choices with tallow candles: dipping or molding.

### To dip candles: {.level3}

First cut the wicks to the proper length and then dip them into melted
tallow. After the first dipping, roll the wicks between the fingers to
thoroughly incorporate the tallow in the wick, then pull the wick
straight and allow it to harden. When hardened, the wicks may be
attached to a dipping frame (which allows you to dip several candles at
once) made of coat-hanger wire. Tie the wicks about 3 inches apart on
the frame and make sure all the wicks will fit into the container of
tallow. Making sure that the tallow is completely melted and warm over a
low flame, dip the wicks quickly into the melted tallow. You want to add
a layer of tallow each time you dip, yet not melt off the previous
layers. It works best if the candle is cold, and some people refrigerate
or even freeze them between dippings. When the candles are cold and set,
immerse again. Continue this process until the candles are as thick as
you like. To store, wrap in tissue.

### To mold candles: {.level3}

Candle molds are available at almost any variety store or hobby shop,
but they are also easy to locate - free of charge - almost everywhere
you look. Milk cartons, paper-towel rolls, empty plastic bottles, paper
cups and cracked tumblers can be found on any trash pile, at any city
dump or in your own kitchen. All make great, disposable candle molds.

You can use nondisposable molds if you first make them stickproof. There
are candle sprays and silicone sprays on the market, and you can also
use a skillet spray which is made of fat. Or you can dust the inside of
a greased mold with talcum or kitchen powder.

Candles are molded upside down, with the upper part of the mold
corresponding to the bottom of the candle and the lower part of the mold
becoming the candle top. Therefore, the bottom of the mold must have a
small piece of excess wick. Preferably it will extend out of the mold,
but this may not always be possible. If not, the extra coiled wick can
be pulled out of the candle later.

With molds such as paper cups, loop one end of the wick over a wire
suspended across the top of the mold, then thread the other end through
a large darning needle and push the needle through the bottom of the
mold at the middle of the cup. The wick may also be knotted where it
comes out of the lower end of the mold in order to keep it taut.

Melted tallow, just hot enough to be fluid, is poured into the mold
until it is filled. Pull the wicks tight and allow the candles to cool.

When cold, the candles will have shrunk in the molds. Refill with warm
tallow and cool again.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71608-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix045.html#a71608-0)

PHOTO: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Candles create the perfect ambiance for the holiday season. This year,
make your own holiday candles out of meat scraps.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter054.html}

::: body
# [Modern Wood Stoves](#toc.html#chap-54) {.chapter-title}

**Whether you're looking for catalytic combustors, pellet fuel or an
update to your old stove, MOTHER 's guide to the more efficient,
environmentally conscious wood stoves can help you find the option
that's best for you.**

**By Gary Turbak**

**December 1991/January 1992**

*Note: Although wood stoves are still used today, many of the "modern"
wood stoves talked about in this article are from 1991, when this
article was originally published in [MOTHER EARTH NEWS]{.small}.*

In inventing the wood stove, Ben Franklin built a freestanding fireplace
with an open front and cast iron sides. A revolutionary idea at the
time, the Pennsylvania Fireplace, as it was called, soon made open
fireplaces obsolete, at least in terms of heating efficiency. For about
200 years after that, wood stoves remained basically unchanged. Then
along came the energy crisis of the 1970s. Motivated by the shortage and
high prices of fossil fuels, Americans turned in droves to wood heat,
but all of those puffing flues produced a lot more than energy
independence. Scientists soon discovered that wood smoke contains a
pharmacopoeia of noxious agents - including formaldehyde, carbon
monoxide, hydrocarbons and polycyclic organic matter - and that wood
stoves were spewing millions of tons of these pollutants into the air
annually. Some of the compounds were carcinogenic; others caused
respiratory problems. And all contributed to a sun-blocking,
lung-irritating, spirit-depressing malaise known as winter haze.

Many communities - first in the western mountains but later all across
the country - began choking on the seasonal wood smoke pall. Schools
kept kids inside for recess, neighbors battled neighbors over smoky
trespass, pollution readings became nightly fare on TV weather reports.
In some places, regulations prohibited fires during the worst episodes,
and a few defiant or careless homeowners got fined for burning wood. One
community even put a red light on everyone's fireplace and a temperature
sensor in the chimney to warn against and detect illegal wood burning.

By 1986 Oregon had prohibited the sale of the most polluting stoves, and
other states began to follow suit. That same year, the federal
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) joined the fray when New York
State and the Natural Resources Defense Council threatened to sue the
agency for failing to keep the country's air clean. For a time, it
appeared that the entire wood stove industry and wood-heating way of
life might be torn asunder in the battle for clean air.

But where chaos once threatened, order is now rapidly returning. In
1986, the EPA environmentalists, scientists, and state agencies sat down
to establish standards for new stoves. They were even joined by the
stove industry - in the form of its 800-member Wood Heating Alliance
(WHA) trade organization. During several months of negotiations, the
participants hammered out mutually acceptable rules. EPA regulations now
prohibit the manufacture and sale of wood stoves that cannot pass a
stringent emissions test. Open fireplaces, wood-fired boilers or
furnaces, and wood cookstoves are exempt from the regulations, but
fireplace inserts and "airtight" fireplaces with gasketed doors are
included.

Homeowners with old stoves can rest easy, however. "The EPA has no
intention of regulating the installation or use of wood stoves," says
the agency's Bob Lebens. (States, counties or municipalities may do so,
however.) As of August 1991, 316 different stoves had passed muster with
EPA's Phase I standard; of those, 134 already meet the agency's tough
Phase II requirements.

The original squawk was centered on the fact that a wood stove pollutes
the air when it burns its fuel incompletely and inefficiently, sending
unburned gases up the chimney in the form of smoke. These days, to
reduce smoke, prevent air pollution, and earn EPA certification
(certificates are valid for five years from issue date and may be
renewed), stove makers now invariably rely on one of three distinctly
different new technologies - catalytic combustors, pellet fuel or the
redesign of existing airtight models.

Catalytic combustors (spin-offs of automobile catalytic - converter
technology) are probably the biggest news in wood burning since the
match. To date, 167 of the 316 EPA-certified stoves use a catalyst to
cut emissions. A typical catalytic combustor is a honeycombed ceramic
cylinder about 6 inches in diameter and 3 inches high. The surfaces of
the honeycomb have been coated or impregnated with a rare metal
catalyst, usually platinum or palladium. Inside the stove, the combustor
is positioned so that smoke must pass through the honeycomb to escape
into the flue.

Smoke consists of combustible gases that will ignite at about 1,000
degrees Fahrenheit. Unfortunately, the fire in most black-box airtight
stoves never gets much above 600 Fahrenheit, which means that a lot of
pollution and lost energy escape up the chimney. In the presence of the
catalyst however, smoke burns at 500 Fahrenheit instead of 1,000
Fahrenheit.

Once a catalytic combustor reaches its "light-off' point of about 500
Fahrenheit, it continues to burn nearly all the smoke passing through
it. The more smoke it consumes, the hotter it gets; and the hotter it
gets, the more smoke it consumes. Combustors cruising along at 1,600
Fahrenheit may glow orange with heat. And since the combustor thrives on
a diet of smoke, it's permissible - even desirable - for the homeowner
to maintain the kind of slow, smoldering fire that would send huge
amounts of smoke belching from any noncatalytic stove.

Catalytic stoves have always tested well in the laboratory, but for a
time doubts lingered about how well they actually performed in the home.
"There's no longer any question about a catalytic stove's ability to
greatly reduce pollution," says Skip Barnett, manager of an in-home
woodburner study done by Omni Environmental Services, a major
stovetesting firm. "In fact, one of the catalytics in our study
performed just as well in a home as it had under ideal lab conditions,
and that's rather remarkable." Experts now agree that a catalytic
combustor in a well-designed stove can reduce pollution from that device
by 90 percent.

Another soldier in the wood-heat revolution is pellet fuel - and the
devices that burn it. A few years ago, entrepreneurs in the Northwest
began turning waste wood from lumber mills into a new form of pelletized
firewood. The pellets consist of wood chips, sawdust, bark and other
scraps that have been dried, pulverized and compressed into tiny
cylinders about 1 inch long and ¼ inch in diameter. The fuel looks a lot
like feed - store rabbit food, and, according to the Association of
Pellet Fuel Industries (APFI), a ton of pellets has about the same
heating value as a cord and a half of firewood. The fuel is typically
sold in 40- or 50-pound bags at an average price of \$80 per ton.

Because pellets contain only about 3 percent moisture (versus 25 percent
or more for seasoned cordwood), they're capable of burning very
cleanly - right in a specially designed stove.

Most of them work like this: A hopper near the top of the stove holds
about 80 pounds of pellets. An electric auger slowly trickles the fuel
from the hopper into a diminutive firebox, where an electric fan forces
air into the fire. The result is a small, hot blaze. Another electric
fan carries the heat away from the stove and into the room.

The pellet idea smoldered for a while with only regional interest, but
in the new era of clean-burning stoves, pellet fuel has really taken
off. At last count, about 30 mills in 14 states were making pellet fuel,
and about two dozen manufacturers make pellet stoves. Hotbeds of
interest are in the Northwest and Midwest, but Vermont, Tennessee,
California and other states also have pellet mills. "Eventually, every
community will have at least one pellet-stove dealer, and every grocery
store will sell pellets," predicts Larry Roberts, secretary of APFI.
"This industry is literally on fire."

Cleanliness is probably the pellet burner's strongest selling point.
Combustion in these devices is so complete that often the only flue
needed is a small class-L vent (similar to that of a natural-gas
furnace). Seven of the 10 cleanest-burning stoves are pellet burners,
and two of these emit an incredibly minuscule 0.5 grams of particulate
per hour. Electricity use by auger and fans is said to be minimal as
well - one stove maker compared it to a pair of continuously burring
100-watt light bulbs.

Another major advantage of pellet burners is their ease of operation:
All a homeowner has to do is fill the hopper with pellets every 15 to 80
hours. Some models even come with a wall thermostat that regulates the
heat output. A thermostat helps eliminate the overheating problem
associated with wood burning. Even without a thermostat, however, pellet
stoves generally provide a very even heat, primarily because fuel is fed
into the firebox at a predictable rate.

Pellet burners are not for everyone, however - especially those who
treasure the sweaty satisfaction of gathering their own wood. And, of
course, the fans and auger make these devices dependent upon
electricity. No power means no fire. "You might as well pipe in natural
gas," grouses one purist.

The third kind of clean-burning stove is a fine-tuned version of the one
you're probably using now. No new fuels or magical catalytic chemistry
here. Instead, manufacturers have taken their airtight models and
tinkered and experimented and modified them until the stoves operate at
the highest possible efficiency and produce the least possible
pollution.

The most common technique is to make the firebox appreciably smaller
than those of most airtight stoves, which tends to increase the
temperature and ignite more smoke and reduce emissions.

"There seems to be an optimum firebox size of about 1.8 cubic feet,"
says Steve Crane, of the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
(DEQ). "Stoves larger than that are likely to have more emissions, and
smaller stoves are not as convenient to use." Many of the cleanest
burning stoves of this type do, however, have fireboxes smaller than 1.5
cubic feet.

Manufacturers have also lied thoroughly the dynamics of air flow inside
the stove. In older stoves, smoke often travels from wood to chimney in
pretty much a straight line, which means that a lot of it escapes
unburned. By adding baffles, plates and secondary air inlets at
strategic spots, stove makers create extra turbulence inside the
firebox. And when smoke churns around inside a stove, it's more likely
to get burned.

Another ploy is to increase firebox insulation, usually with additional
or more-heat-resistant brick. This can boost the stove's internal
temperature and cause more smoke to ignite. A few stove manufacturers
also make their devices "foolproof" by making it impossible for a
homeowner to close the draft past a certain point.

All of these machinations can reduce emissions. Many of the high-tech,
noncatalytic stoves (as they're called) have met EPA standards, but they
generally come in behind catalytics and pellet burners in the
pollution-reduction race. Sometimes they have other drawbacks as well:
The small firebox size means frequent feeding and ash removal; all-night
burns are largely a thing of the past; and too much insulation on a
stove can send valuable heat up the chimney instead of into the room. As
a result, few of these devices could be considered convenient
whole-house heaters.

In addition to being technically difficult, reducing wood stove
pollution can be expensive. High-tech, noncatalytic models start at
about \$600, and the most pricey pellet burner tops out at about
\$2,300. Catalytic stoves fall somewhere in between, but catalytic
combustors must be replaced after about 12,000 hours of use at a cost of
\$30 to \$100. Most high-quality EPA approved stoves, regardless of
technology, cost between \$750 and \$1,400.

"EPA's involvement in all this probably adds about \$200 to the cost of
a catalytic stove and \$120 to a non catalytic," says the agency's Bob
Lebens. However, some of that extra expense may come back to the
homeowner via less-frequent chimney cleanings and reduced firewood
consumption. Good catalytic stoves, for example, have been known to cut
wood use by 30 percent.

"In the long run," says Lebens, "a clean-burning certified stove may
actually be cheaper than one that is initially less expensive." In
addition, the EPA predicts an annual reduction of \$1.3 billion in
health costs and property damages resulting from exposure to wood smoke.

If you'd like to step with just one foot - and less expense - into the
new age of wood burning, you can do so by modifying your present stove.
A device called the Collins Hopper - complete with bin, auger, and fan -
turns almost any black-box stove into a pellet burner. Hoppers sell for
about \$600.

To go catalytic, you can install in your lower flue one of the several
add-on catalytic combustors, devices that have been around for several
years without really catching on. "Maybe that's because most of them
make the flue look like an ostrich that has swallowed a baseball," jokes
Dave Collier, a stove-certification analyst with the Oregon DEQ.

But what of wood burning's ambience? Are the independence, the
self-reliance, the cozy glow still intact?

Last winter, the DEQ tested add-on combustors and came away optimistic.
"They can't reduce emissions the way a well-designed catalytic stove
can, but we were generally pleased with their performance," says
Collier. "They seem to be a good idea that hasn't fully developed yet."
Catalytic add-ons generally sell for about \$250.

The latest wood stove revolution has also changed some of wood-burning's
basic tenets and traditions. Pellet fuel, of course, is an entirely new
ball game with its own set of rules. The high-tech, noncatalytic stoves
often require more frequent attention and shorter logs.

And even if a stove can hold a fire overnight, it's generally considered
antisocial behavior these days to burn a slow, smoky fire.

The greatest changes, however, involve catalytics. With these stoves,
moisture content and wood species suddenly don't make a difference any
more. In fact, wood that is slightly wet often works best because it
creates more smoke, which is what catalytic combustors feed on. Really
dry wood, on the other hand, may burn too fast and overload the
catalyst.

An important note: Burning wood that has been painted, pressure treated,
oiled or impregnated with creosote can destroy the catalytic combustor.
So can artificial logs, colored paper and chemical chimney cleaners.
Essentially, the only things that should go into a catalytic stove are
natural wood and regular (black and white) newspaper.

And speaking of creosote, its buildup in chimneys and pipes is largely
eliminated with the new low-pollution stoves. Reductions of up to 90
percent have been reported.

Appearance is very much a part of the wood-burning revolution, too. The
black box has given way to a dazzling array of more than 700 stove
models with sweeping contours, porcelain or ceramic finishes, decorator
colors and chrome, silver, or gold trim. Some look like antiques, others
like space-age furniture. One pellet stove comes encased in a
brass-trimmed, varnished oak cabinet; another boasts computerized
controls. Many new stoves feature glass doors, and most manufacturers
have figured out how to keep them free of soot (usually by sending a
stream of air over the interior surface).

But what of wood burning's ambience? Are the independence, the
self-reliance, the cozy glow still intact? In going from art to science,
has wood burning lost its appeal? The answer seems to be a resounding
"no."

"Wood heating is alive and well," says Diana Takvam, of the WHA. If
anything, the new technology has improved things by removing any guilt
that may have existed and by making the appliances increasingly
attractive. "The warm, genial ambience of wood heat is still intact,"
says Takvam. "A wood fire has always been the heart of the home, and
that feeling isn't about to go away."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Smoke By The Numbers {.level3}

To meet Environmental Protection Agency requirements, a manufacturer
must send a stove from each of its model lines to one of eight
EPA-certified commercial testing laboratories. There, stoves are fired
up and the particulate emissions (solid, unburned hydrocarbons) are
measured. Additional components of wood smoke could also be gauged, but
low particulate emission means that other pollutants are scarce, too.
EPA's benchmark is the number of grams of particulate given off during
an hour of burning (g/hr). Stoves that fail the test cannot be
manufactured.

The EPA is implementing regulations in two phases: Phase I covers stoves
manufactured between July 1988 and July 1990. Catalytic stoves made
during this phase may emit no more than 5.5 g/hr, and noncatalytic
stoves no more than 8.5 g/hr. Phase II covers stoves manufactured after
July 1, 1990. During this phase, catalytic stoves may emit no more than
4.1 g/hr and noncatalytic stoves no more than 7.5 g/hr. Catalytic stoves
have more stringent testing requirements because the catalyst gradually
degrades over time and later emits more particulates than when it was
new.

Following the implementation of each phase, there is a two-year "grace
period" during which existing inventories of non-complying stoves may be
sold. Consequently, the regulations were first felt at the retail level
on July 1, 1990, when all stoves sold must have met Phase I standards.
After July 1, 1992, all stoves sold must meet Phase II requirements. All
EPA-certified stoves will be labeled as such.

"Buyers should be aware that low-emission stoves usually don't burn as
cleanly at home as they do in the lab," warns Steve Crane, of the Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality. "Catalytic combustors deteriorate,
baffles warp, gaskets crack and dampers stick." Although the
grams-per-hour figures mentioned above may not be achieved at home, they
do provide a good basis for comparing stoves - much as miles-per-gallon
tests are used to compare fuel efficiency in automobiles.

### It Isn't Just For Wood Anymore {.level3}

When it comes to the future of pellet stoves, even the cutting-edge
technology of quarter-inch "white-wood" (sawdust and shavings from trees
that have been debarked) pellets may be edged out by regional materials
that will cut the cost to consumers.

Today, nearly all pellet stoves burn best using "low-ash fuel" with 1
percent ash or less. It burns hot and efficiently, produces little ash
and invisible emissions, and contains few of the impurities that
eventually lead to service problems.

The Northwest's abundant supply of white-wood pellet material has been
cited as the reason most pellet stoves reside in the Pacific woods. But
that's soon to change. Stovemakers, aware of the vast amount of
alternative fuels in other regions, are adapting their stoves to burn
materials such as corncobs from Nebraska, walnut shells from Missouri,
sunflower hulls from Minnesota, particle board "nuggets" from Virginia.
a cardboard-wood hybrid from Vermont, and even bits of coal from
Washington.

"The pellet-stove phenomenon doesn't have to be just ¼-inch pellets from
Northwestern lumber mills." says Jim Hermann. president of Earth Stove
of Tualatin, Ore. "You're not going to find a lot of trees in Nebraska."
And the cost of hauling fuel from the northwest to distant markets can
negate the financial incentive of burning pellets. As a result, the
industry is increasingly seeking regionally available fuel to bridge the
gap.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71610-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix046.html#a71610-0)

PHOTO: IMAGINE MEDIA SERVICES

The Whifield Advantage II-T freestanding stove, from Pyre Industries
(Burlington, WA) emits just 1.3 g/hr at 80 percent efficiency.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71610-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix046.html#a71610-1)

 

IMAGINE MEDIA SERVICES

Left: The Destiny pellet stove, from Horizon Research, Inc. Right: The
catalytic Defiant Encore, from Vermont Castings (Randolph, VT).
:::
:::

[]{#chapter055.html}

::: body
# [How To Build A Fire In A Woodstove](#toc.html#chap-55) {.chapter-title}

**You can learn how to build a fire in different types of woodstoves
quickly and easily.**

**By David Petersen**

**December 1991/January 1992**

The little cabin that serves me as library, study and workshop was
plenty cold this morning, as it is every morning this time of year. But
within seconds of walking through the door, I had a fire roaring in the
ancient Monkey Ward's potbelly over in the corner. Another 15 minutes,
and I was shedding shirts and closing dampers.

It's a wintertime woodstove routine I've come to cherish: In the late
afternoon, I allow the fire to die out. Then, just before leaving in the
evening - after checking to see that no live coals are hibernating down
in the ash pan - I crumple up a couple of sheets of newspaper and toss
them into the back mouth of the stove. Over the wad of paper I arrange a
tepee of six or eight finger-thick kindling sticks. I top the fuel pile
off with a tepee of three medium-size splits of pine or aspen, then
close the doors and dampers (insurance against a spontaneous nocturnal
flame-up), refill the stove-top caffeine kettle with a fresh load of
well water, then close up shop and hump the hill to home and hearth.

Next morning, as soon as I walk into the board-and-batten icebox, I open
the stovepipe damper and the draft control in the bottom stove door,
strike a match, touch it to the waiting burnables and am instantly on my
way to comfort and coffee.

Of course, my pyro technique wasn't always so surefire. Matter of fact,
when I first began playing around with woodstove heat, I often ran
through half a box of kitchen matches and a pint of charcoal lighter
fluid - and got naught for my efforts but brief, explosive flames and
choking clouds of smoke.

But we all have to start someplace. And since those unsuccessful early
fires were more recreational than functional, it was no catastrophe when
they (and I) failed. These days, though, wood heat is the only heat up
here on this cold old mountain. Either I get my fires started - and keep
them going - or I freeze.

Across the years, I've committed most every flame-making mistake
imaginable, but I learned from my failures (albeit slowly and sometimes
painfully) and eventually triumphed in my quest for dependable fire.

To save you some of that frustration, I'd like to share a bit of what
I've learned about how to build a fire in a woodstove - all basic stuff.
If you're an old hand at heating or cooking with wood, the primer that
follows - drawn from personal experience tempered with the advice of
experts - will probably be no more than a review. But if you're one of
the roughly three-quarter million Americans who purchased a woodburning
appliance - or a home containing one - within the last 12 months
(approximately half of whom were first-time users) and are finding that
starting a fire and keeping it going is more pain than pleasure, this
one is for you.

## How to Build a Fire With Minimum Hassle {.level2}

First, let's shoot down some common firemaking troubles. Most
uncooperative fires can be traced to three causes: 1) damp wood, 2)
improperly installed or tuned appliances, including fireplaces or 3) a
poor arrangement of fuel within the appliance.

You may have heard that firewood is best when dried to about 20 percent
moisture content. To reach this 20-percent goal, the experts advise, we
should cut and split our wood to stove size chunks, stack it (preferably
under a roof) so that air can circulate between pieces, and allow it to
season for at least six months (a year is twice as good) before burning.

That's well-seasoned advice, but don't rely on it blindly. Drying time
will be longer in high-humidity locales, shorter in arid climes; longer
for wood cut green (live), shorter for splits from dead trees; and
longer for some species of wood, shorter for others.

Slow ignition, poor burning and lots of white smoke indicate unseasoned
fuel; a split of firewood that has darkened at the ends and begun to
check (crack) will usually light and burn readily. In short, get your
winter's fuel in as early as possible, and if you buy your wood, don't
trust that it will be delivered seasoned and you won't be disappointed.
Store it properly, live an active, self-directed life, follow the Golden
Rule, and you'll keep warm no matter how cold things get on the outside.

A second common cause of hard-starting and poor-burning fires is an
improperly installed or tuned appliance. Most often, equipment-related
burning problems can be traced to poor drafting due to a stovepipe
that's either too short (it should project at least above the ridge of
your roof) or of the wrong diameter. Also, an airtight house can starve
a fire of the oxygen it needs for proper combustion (easily cured by
cracking a window). If in doubt, ask an inspector from your local fire
department or the dealer who sold you the stove to come out and critique
your wood-burning setup.

Finally, many a fire is defeated from the outset by an improper
arrangement of fuel. This can mean using too little kindling to ignite
the larger splits, trying to make a fire with just one big log or
cramming too many logs into a stove or fireplace-leaving insufficient
room for combustion air to circulate.

There are three basic requirements for starting and maintaining a fire
in a woodstove: dry fuel, good drafting and an arrangement of
combustibles within the stove that will allow air to flow in beneath and
rise up through it. I've already described my method for making flame in
a potbelly stove (or any upright stove): a couple of sheets of crumpled
newspaper in the bottom, a tepee of kindling arranged over the paper, a
few medium size splits of a fast-burning variety of wood in a tepee over
the kindling, open the draft control in the bottom stove door, open the
stovepipe damper, set match to paper. Hot stuff.

Because a potbelly is taller than it is wide, fuel is fed in vertically
through the top door. But most woodstoves today are boxy and wider than
they are tall, allowing fuel to be loaded horizontally.

The big airtight box stove my wife supervises in the cabin up the hill
is a modern variation of the old Ben Franklin design: rectangular with
big double doors across the front. A common fire-building technique for
this type of stove is to place a large split of firewood along the back
wall of the appliance, a second split parallel to the first but as near
the front as possible, a wad of crumpled newspaper between the two logs,
several sticks of kindling atop the newspaper and a roof of two or three
medium-sized starter splits angled across the two bottom logs and spaced
an inch or so apart. Or simply build a tepee of crumpled paper, kindling
and medium-size firewood splits in the center of the stove, as I do in
my potbelly. With the fuel in place, open the stovepipe damper (if the
unit has one) and the draft control, set match to paper, and leave the
doors open (with the fire screen closed) until the action picks up
(usually just a minute or so). Now close the stove doors, adjust the
damper (if necessary; most are automatic these days), and relax with a
good magazine.

## How to Build a Fire in a Narrow Scandinavian-Type Box Stove {.level2}

A variation on the first method I described for Franklin stoves: The
arrangement of fuel is the same, but you insert the fuel from a narrow
side of the stove, so that the two largest splits are at the sides of
the stove rather than front or rear.

## How to Build a Fire in a Wood-Burning Cookstove {.level2}

I've owned only one wood cookstove thus far, a basket case on which I
lavished an entire summer's spare time - identifying, sorting, cleaning,
refinishing and reassembling the puzzle-like parts - after which I up
and moved 2,000 miles and had to leave the weighty little beauty behind.
So the advice that follows isn't from personal experience but from a
timeless treasure of wood cookstove lore, a little 1925 booklet called
*The Secret of Better Baking,* by Mary D. Chambers:

"If a match is lighted, the flame shoots upward. The hot blaze causes a
draft, drawing fresh air from below and supplying the oxygen necessary
for combustion. The \[wood-burning\] range simply makes use of this
basic principle on a large scale. To start the fire, then, have on hand
plenty of free-burning fuel-dry paper and wood cut small. A folded
newspaper will not burn freely, but a few sheets, lightly twisted, make
a good first layer. Then add a moderate supply of kindling wood, laid in
loosely. Before lighting, open the door or vent under the fire, the
direct draft to the chimney (over the oven), the check-slide at the base
of the smoke pipe and the damper in the smoke pipe. The purpose is to
promote a free passage of air up through the firebox to the chimney by
the most direct route.

"Light the fire from below and allow it to get a good start. If it burns
too slowly, it needs more oxygen, which can be supplied by opening the
door wide under the fire. If it burns too fast, it will produce more
smoke than the chimney can draw off, and the excess will be thrown into
the room. Partly closing the door under the fire will retard it. Before
applying larger pieces of wood or coal, add a little more kindling. The
grate should be well-covered with a brisk fire, both to support and
ignite the larger fuel evenly and to prevent waste through the gate.
When the bigger fire has a good start, the oven damper may be closed.

"The process of keeping up a good fire is merely one of adding more
fuel, and occasionally \`shaking down' to remove the ashes under the
fire. Do not allow ashes to collect close up under the grate. They will
kill the tire and cause the hot coals above to burn out the grate.

"If the draft of air through the firebox continues unchecked, the fuel
soon burns out, and the top of the range gets red-hot-a bad thing for
the stove. The fire needs to be curbed. This may be accomplished in
various ways: by closing tight the door and slide under the fire, by
partially closing the damper in the stovepipe or pushing in the slide
near the stovepipe collar on top of the range, by opening the slide in
the broiler door at the end of the range over the fire or by tipping or
covers over the fire.

"The chimney keeps pulling for air, and the fire is checked by reducing
the amount of suction or by allowing the air to rush in over the fire,
instead of through it."

## How to Build a Fire Using Shortcuts {.level2}

In addition to newspaper and kindling, other popular fire-starters
include kerosene, charcoal-lighter fluid, lightwood and a wide array of
concoctions.

I know one fellow who keeps a pint of deodorized kerosene in a plastic
squeeze bottle stored safely away from his woodstove. After laying a
fire, he squirts a little kerosene on the kindling, returns the bottle
to its corner, then lights the fire. Since kerosene burns as a liquid
rather than a vapor, there's no danger of an explosion in a cold stove,
as there would be gasoline or a Coleman-type fuel.

This fellow and others I know have used kerosene as a fire starter for
years without burning their houses down or themselves up. But I doubt
that one professional firefighter in a thousand would endorse such a
shortcut. At the very least, never squirt kerosene or lighter fluid on
open flame or glowing coals; the heat will vaporize the liquid, creating
a decidedly explosive situation.

Lightwood is kindling split from a heavily resinous wood such as eastern
pitch pine, or from the sappy portions of most any conifer. Lightwood is
a safe and reliable fire starter when used in small quantities. If you
know of an old pine stump that's been hunkering out there sucking up
resin from its roots for some years now, split off a few small kindling
sticks and give them a try. Generally, one lightwood stick at the bottom
of a kindling pile will do the trick, relieving you of the inky chore of
crumpling up newspaper. Commercial fire starters? The few I've tried all
work and are perfectly safe when used as directed. But they're pretty
expensive for daily use, and-once you've mastered the basics, they're
superfluous as well.

## How to Build a Fire With What's Available {.level2}

No matter the configuration of your wood burner - woodstove or
cookstove - you'll do well to use softwoods (pine, spruce, fir), poplars
(including aspen and cottonwood) or untreated lumber scraps for kindling
and starter splits. When the fire gets to cooking, switch to hardwood
for a long, hot burn. For an aromatic flourish, toss in a split or two
of smell good wood such as cedar, juniper, pinon, mesquite. apple,
orange, cherry, pecan or hickory. Thus, a perfect firewood pile might
consist of about 25 percent softwoods (and soft "hardwoods") for
kindling and starter splits, and 75 percent hardwoods-including some of
the aromatic varieties-for serious fuel.\
\
Of course, life is rarely perfect. But a good fireplace or stove will
digest just about any sort of dry wood you feed it, and give a good
measure of heat in return. Accordingly, I've come to believe that the
"best" firewood is that which is easiest to lay my hands on. When I was
living in the Appalachians, I burned hardwoods because 1 was surrounded
by mountains of the stuff. Here in the Rockies, I burn mostly quaking
aspen-a very soft hardwood that's generally considered to be marginal
fuel at best. But aspen is easy to cut and split, light (when dry) to
tote or toss around: it seasons quickly, burns with little smoke and,
therefore, with virtually no creosote, has a pleasant, spicy aroma-and
I'm now surrounded by mountains of that stuff. So what the heck. When
you're hot, you're hot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## What to Do With Wood Ashes {.level2}

Looking at things ecologically, ashes belong on the ground. By
sprinkling ashes on the soil in the forest or woodlot, we complete one
of nature's great cycles. The mineral substances in the ashes are
available to make new wood. and all we've really taken out of the forest
is renewable solar energy.

Looking at things ecologically, ashes belong on the ground. By
sprinkling ashes on the soil in the forest or woodlot, we complete one
of nature's great cycles. The mineral substances in the ashes are
available to make new wood. and all we've really taken out of the forest
is renewable solar energy.

## Other Uses for Wood Ashes: {.level2}

**Fertilizing the garden.** Wood ashes contain significant amounts of
several minerals essential to the healthy growth of plants. They also
contain potash, which is useful for neutralizing excess acidity in some
soils. It is best, however, to remember that sonic plants do best in
soils that are on the acid side. Garden-supply houses sell inexpensive
kits for determining whether soil is acid or alkaline.

Wood ashes should be stored in a dry place if they are to be used as
fertilizer, because water will leach away several important minerals. To
enrich the ashes even further, burn bones from the table in the stove.
They will crumble to powder, adding calcium, phosphorus and other
elements to the ashes.

**Making alkali.** Soap is made from fat and lye. In the old days, lye
was made by trickling water through wood ashes and boiling down the
resulting liquor to concentrate the alkali. For best results. use rain
or snow water (which has minimum mineral content) and boil it first (to
remove carbon dioxide). Do not use iron or aluminum vessels at any stage
of the process, because they are affected by alkalis.

**Melting snow.** A thin layer of wood ashes on snow will encourage more
rapid melting, since the dark ashes absorb sunlight. This is a handy
trick for clearing the garden and allowing the sun to warm the bare
earth a bit sooner in the springtime.

**Deodorizing outhouses.** A layer of ashes forms a physical barrier to
odor, and the alkalinity interferes with bacterial action and the growth
of fly larvae. For best results, keep a can of ashes right inside the
privy and apply a small amount daily.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71612-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix047.html#a71612-0)

PHOTO: ISTOCKPHOTO/ANGELERA

A woodstove fire can keep you and your family warm and cozy when it's
cold outside.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71612-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix047.html#a71612-1)

IMAGINE MEDIA SERVICES

The Whitfield Renaissance Pellet Stove by Pyre industries emits only .4
g/hr and operates of 82 percent efficiency.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter056.html}

::: body
# [Wood Stove Cooking](#toc.html#chap-56) {.chapter-title}

**You can use your wood stove for more than just heating your home. Here
are some techniques and recipes to try for cooking on a wood stove.**

**By Fred and Helen Brassel**

**December/January 1991**

Most people only consider their woodstove useful for heating a room. And
when we purchased ours to cut oil costs, we never gave a thought to
using it as a cooking stove.

But one day, bolstered by the surprising amount of heat dispensed by our
stove, we tentatively approached it with tea kettle in hand. Once we
were successful (with a little patience), we quickly graduated to soups
and stews. Though ours doesn't have the versatility of a wood cookstove
designed for kitchen duty, it does have some workable similarities.

The surface of our woodstove isn't usually hot enough for frying foods
but it is perfect for simmering and slow cooking. We've even managed to
use our "oven" (firebox) in much the same way as we use our charcoal
grill in the summertime.

## [Grilling]{.black} {.level2}

The hot coals will cook foil-wrapped vegetables or individual packets of
meat. For baked potatoes, wrap them in heavy duty foil and place in the
hot ashes of the fire. These will take from 45 minutes to one hour to
cook.

Corn can be cooked in foil, too. Strip husks down to the end of the ear
but don't tear them off. Remove silk, butter generously, and bring husks
up around corn, making sure all the kernels are covered. Wrap in double
thickness of heavy-duty foil, twist ends, and nestle in hot ashes.

Sliced zucchini can be seasoned with oregano and mixed with chopped
tomato and butter. Double wrap and cook in ashes. Small beets can be
cooked directly on the hot coals: Just sprinkle them with water, dot
with chunks of butter, and double wrap in heavy-duty foil.

For grilled chicken, marinate 2-inch pieces of chicken breast in soy
sauce, some powdered ginger, a little sugar, and garlic powder to taste
for two hours. Place a few pieces and some marinade in a double wrapping
of heavy-duty foil. Repeat until all the chicken is wrapped tightly,
then place the packets on the coals until done.

## [All-in-Ones]{.black} {.level2}

Individual meals, such as the hobo dinner, can be cooked in pound-size
coffee cans nestled in hot coals. Shape half a pound of ground beef into
a large patty the size of the bottom of the coffee can. Top with sliced
onions, a sliced potato and half an ear of corn; sprinkle with salt and
pepper. Cover can tightly with double-wrapped aluminum foil. Nestle can
among hot coals, but do not set directly on top of them. This will take
at least an hour to cook.

There is no way to gauge the heat of the fire, so you cannot time the
cooking process. Use a two-pronged fork to check the tenderness of the
vegetables (we like ours with just a little crunch left).

## [Baking]{.black} {.level2}

There are various woodstove baking ovens on the market for cooking small
baked goods, but an inverted cast-iron pot has worked well for us. I
place the cover of the pot upside down on the stove, put a bread pan or
small muffin pan on top of that, and then top the cover and pan with
inverted cooking pot.

Granted, this is a crude contraption and it does seem to take forever
sometimes for the baked goods to be done, but it works - it just takes
longer than a conventional oven.

## [Cookware]{.black} {.level2}

Traditional cast-iron cookware is by far the most effective utensil for
woodstove use. Cast iron provides even heat and needs little care. Each
piece should be treated to stave off rust and to prevent foods from
sticking. To accomplish this, coat the pan with vegetable oil and heat
for two hours in a 300-degree Fahrenheit oven. Check periodically to see
if the oil has been absorbed and add more if necessary. Let cool and
wipe off any excess. After you've finished cooking, clean the pot with
paper towels and scour stubborn spots with salt (avoid cleaning with
soap or detergents).

Cooking techniques vary little whether the fuel is wood or coal: The
difference is in the higher intensity of heat from the burning of coal.
With either fuel, the heat is often not evenly distributed on the
stove's surface.

The real trick is to move the pots around, depending upon your needs. If
a pot is bubbling too hard, either move it to a cooler area on the
woodstove or set it on a metal trivet. If more heat is required, set the
pan directly over the area where the coals are burning hottest, which is
usually in the center of the stovetop.

As confidence in your ability to cook on a woodstove grows, so will your
assurance that almost anything cooked on a conventional range can be
cooked on a woodstove. Your imagination is your greatest tool, and your
cooking methods are uniquely your own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## [Bean Soup]{.black} {.level2}

There are several complementary vegetable/protein combinations that are
the nutritional equivalent of meat. The familiar macaroni and cheese is
one, as well as the less familiar bean-and-pasta combination found in
this soup.

*1 cup dried Great Northern beans\
2 carrots, chopped\
1 celery stalk, chopped\
1 large onion, chopped\
3 beef bouillon cubes\
1/2 pound whole-wheat pasta, broken up\
Freshly grated Parmesan cheese*

Cover the beans with 3 cups cold water and let stand overnight. Combine
the beans and bean liquid, carrots, celery and onion in large pot. Add
the beef bouillon cubes along with 3 cups water. Bring the mixture to a
boil (on your conventional stove if you want to save time), and simmer
covered (on woodstove), for two hours or until beans are tender.
Remember to build up the fire periodically to keep the soup at the
simmering point. Add the pasta and simmer 10 more minutes. Serve topped
with grated Parmesan cheese. Makes 6 servings.

## [Chapatis]{.black} {.level2}

*2 cups whole-wheat flour\
1/2 teaspoon salt\
2 tablespoons oil*

Combine the flour, salt and oil; mix well. Gradually add 1/2 to 1 cup
water until dough is smooth, but not sticky. Knead 10 minutes. Divide
into 12 egg-sized pieces. Roll out very thin on floured surface. Cook on
slightly oiled frying pan until dry. Turn and cook the other side. On
conventional stove, bubbles will form on the chapatis. On the wood
burner, they cook more slowly, resulting in a crisp, cracker-like bread.
The longer they are left on the stove, the crisper they get.

## [Apple Crunch]{.black} {.level2}

4 tablespoons butter\
1/2 cup quick-cooking oatmeal\
4 tablespoons brown sugar\
4 tablespoons chopped walnuts\
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon\
1 cup sugar\
4 apples, peeled and thinly sliced

Melt the butter in frying pan on stove. Add oatmeal, brown sugar,
walnuts and cinnamon. Cook 1 minute. Remove from pan and set aside. Pour
1 cup hot water into pan. Add sugar and stir well. Add apples and cook
covered until tender (approximately 45 minutes to 1 hour, depending on
the heat of the stove). Drain. Put apples in individual serving dishes
and top with crunch. This can be served over ice cream or topped with
whipped cream. For a quicker dessert, use canned apples or applesauce.
Makes 6 servings.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71614-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix048.html#a71614-0)

PHOTO: STEVEN MARK NEEDHAM/ENVISION

Eggplant wrapped in foil is wonderful when you add basil and tomato
slices.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter057.html}

::: body
# [Bald Eagle Watching In Sauk-Prairie, Wis.](#toc.html#chap-57) {.chapter-title}

**Once endangered, the bald eagle population in Sauk-Prairie, Wis., has
soared in recent decades.**

**By Les Davenport**

**December 1991/January 1992**

An orange glow in the eastern sky announces that dawn is near. Shapes on
the horizon take form as the ever-increasing brightness lights a hidden
landscape. The sun's initial rays debut, prompting movement in distant
treetops. A day of bald eagle watching has started.

Today begins the Eagle Lover's Rendezvous, along the lower Wisconsin
River. Hundreds of wool-clad onlookers puff little billows of steam and
wait patiently in the January dawn for the first giant bird to take
flight.

Across the river, a majestic figure floats over the tree line. It soars
gracefully and almost seems suspended in midair. Clicking cameras break
the silence as a throng of birdwatchers holds its collective breath. A
young boy excitedly whispers, "Is that one, Dad?" The answer is
affirmative. Welcome to Sauk-Prairie, Wis., and the first day of the
annual migration of the bald eagle.

Of 8,600 known birds of the world, the bald eagle (Haliaeetus
leucocephalus, order Falconiformes) has gained more than its share of
attention. Exclusive to North America, it has been a premier predator of
the heavens for thousands of years, and justifiably so. An adult of this
species has only one noteworthy enemy - man. Until recent decades,
careless disregard for this beautiful bird nearly caused its extinction.

Bald eagles literally dominated the skies of North America before the
1800s. Shortly into the 19th century, however, habitat destruction and
the shooting of eagles for sport started their gradual decline. With the
birds careening dangerously toward extinction, the government initiated
passage of the Migratory Bird Treaty of 1916 and, a number of years
later, the Bald Eagle Protection Act of 1940. Violators faced fines of
up to \$20,000 and one to five years imprisonment. Enforcement, though,
was weak. By 1950, eagles no longer existed in many of their previous
habitats.

With only 82 known pairs left nesting within its borders, the state of
Wisconsin finally took action. In 1972 the bald eagle was placed on the
Badger State's endangered species list. That same banner year, the
federal government outlawed DDT and other organochlorine pesticides that
had been contaminating the eagle's food chain. These actions marked the
turning point for the eagle's restoration. Unfortunately, recovery has
been slow.

Most residents of Wisconsin have supported their state's contribution to
aiding the plight of bald eagles; however, two communities deserve a
standing ovation. The urban and rural folks of Sauk City and Prairie du
Sac have dedicated themselves to the long-term welfare of eagles and
other migratory birds that winter in the trees of the lower Wisconsin
River.

**Physical Attributes of the Bald Eagle**

When admiring the bald eagle, you many find it hard to fathom that
President Thomas Jefferson could have proposed the turkey as our
national symbol. A female eagle is 34 to 43 inches tall, a male 30 to 35
inches. The wings of a "baldie" span 7 feet and easily carry the bird's
weight of eight to 14 pounds. Its white head is described by its common
name, "bald," and the scientific name, leucoccephalus. The adult's dark
brown body contrasts strikingly with its white head and tail. Its feet,
eyes, and large, extruded bills are yellow. Breeding season begins in
mid-February; offspring typically leave the nest by August.

The immature bald eagle is more difficult to identify. It has a dark
brown body and only sprinkles of white on the underwings and tail. Its
head and tail don't turn fully white until the eagle reaches the age of
4 or 5. Its feet are yellow, like an adult's, but its bill and eyes are
brown. As such, immatures are often mistaken for golden eagles or hawks.

**What to Bring and Where to Observe**

Let there be no mistake, fellow bird-watchers: The late-winter
eagle-watching season (January, February, March) in Wisconsin is cold -
really cold. Expect daytime temperatures that are 20 degrees on either
side of zero (I remember one February morning at 10 degrees above ... in
the sunshine). Be sure to bring warm undergarments, a wool stocking hat,
and most of all, warm boots and gloves. Those who have trouble adapting
to cold weather can easily watch the eagles from inside a warm car -
there are hundreds of accessible pull-offs within safe watching
distance.

When photographing eagles in flight above the river, a 70-210mm zoom
lens does a good job. But serious shutterbugs who wish to photograph
birds perched in the trees across from Sauk-Prairie need more
magnification. A 500 mm telephoto lens would be the minimum
recommendation. In either case, be sure to bring a tripod or monopod for
clear exposures.

The winter sky of Wisconsin can be pristine blue or cloud gray. So, for
best photo results, carry 100-, 200-, or 400-speed (ASA) film. The best
all-around film for part-time photographers, though, is 200.

Binoculars are another eagle-watching must, and for those who might not
have yet invested in a good pair, here are some tips: "Power" is the
amount of magnification and is expressed in the first part of a
numerical formula engraved on the body of the glasses: 7x 35, for
example. 7x means that the binoculars magnify the image your eye sees by
seven times. The second numeric designation in the formula describes the
diameter in millimeters of the objective lens (big end). 7x 35
binoculars have an objective lens measuring 35 mm across.

Birders seldom use binoculars with a magnification of less than 7x or
greater than 10x - any less and birds are not enlarged sufficiently; any
greater and the field of view tends to become restricted and outweighs
the benefit of higher magnification. For ease of viewing Sauk-Prairie
eagles, a pair of 7x 35 or IN 40 glasses suffices nicely.

Among the best spots to watch for eagles are the dam (just off Route 78
and one mile north of Prairie du Sac) and Veteran's Park (located below
the dam just north of the Route 60 bridge). Veteran's has plenty of
parking as well as a boat launch for anglers. A trail in the August
Derleth Park in Sauk City parallels the river. The river-edge walk can
be exhilarating, and eagles pass there en route to the dam.

On the days in late February and March when slightly heavier fishing
pressure occurs below the dam, the August Derleth Park trail can be a
better watch point than the dam or Veteran's Park. Although the eagles
seem to know that anglers are friends, their nature causes them to keep
a safe distance.

**The Future of the Sauk-Prairie Eagles**

There are days when the skies of Sauk-Prairie are so alive with
"baldies" that it's hard to believe they were ever threatened by
extinction. Aerial acrobatics performed by the eagles and their close
cousins, the peregrine falcons and ospreys, are a sight to behold for
newcomers.

To the casual spectator, members of the Falconiformes order are simply
things of grace - free spirits that ride the wind. But to a dedicated
bird-watcher, these birds are the thread that belongs in the magnificent
tapestry of life. It is these hard-core naturalists who have spoken out
against injustice to the eagle and who continually prompt governmental
bodies to act on behalf of the bird's well-being. A good example of this
occurred on the lower Wisconsin.

The Ferry Bluff Eagle Council, a support group of the Wisconsin Wildlife
Federation, took a bold and unusual approach in protecting the eagle's
vital wintering grounds in the Sauk-Prairie area: After documenting the
roosting and feeding territories of the eagles, it became obvious that
many of the sites were on private property and not under the management
policies of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Council president
Dave Erickson contacted Robert Horwich, a biologist who successfully
achieved a "community sanctuary" for the endangered black howler monkey
of Belize, in Central America.

"In Belize," Horwich said, "we looked at the monkey's range and
discovered that most of it was on private land." Through many long
hours, Horwich obtained pledges from more than 100 farmers saying they
would practice positive land use. The landowners later aligned with the
Belize Audubon Society to establish a longterm management plan for the
monkeys.

Erickson and Horwich agreed that a similar management plan was needed in
order for Sauk-Prairie eagles to regenerate their former numbers.
Horwich assisted Erickson and the eagle council in establishing the
Sauk-Prairie Community Eagle Sanctuary.

The sanctuary's implementation on the lower Wisconsin riverway yielded
community awareness like never before. The most important aspect of
sanctuary management, Erickson said, would be that the woods in the
vicinity of the roost be undisturbed, and that human activity be
severely restricted there during winter months. Thus, property owners
who were unaware of roosts on remote portions of their tracts were
recruited as faithful guardians. Also, through council recommendations
to the DNR, hunting in specific roosting areas was discontinued between
November 15 and March 13.

No longer considered endangered, the bald eagle has recently been moved
into the "threatened species" category. It is projected that by the year
2000, nearly 400 breeding pairs will fly the skies of Wisconsin. Only
through the foresight of groups such as the Ferry Bluff Eagle Council
has the banishment of this magnificent bird been staved off.

**What You Can Do to Help Boost Eagle Population**

Join the Ferry Bluff Eagle Council: Though most people just make a
donation, active participation is most welcome. With council
supervision, members can help locate roosts and feeding areas, gather
information on wintering eagles for a scientific data base, develop
viewing areas for the growing number of eagle lovers, and encourage the
reestablishment of a year-round breeding population at Sauk-Prairie.
When you join, you will receive a FBEC newsletter and other mailings
concerning bald eagles. For more information, visit the [Ferry Bluff
Eagle Council](http://www.ferrybluffeaglecouncil.org/index.html)
website.

Adopt a nest: By becoming a bald eagle nest sponsor, you can help
continue the important work of monitoring and managing our eagle
population. Individuals, clubs, schools and other groups can become bald
eagle "foster parents" by contributing an adoption fee. All
contributions are used specifically for bald eagle management and such
educational activities as aerial surveys, the rescue and rehabilitation
of sick or orphaned young, educational materials for schools and
meetings with private landowners to protect nest trees.

For more information, visit the [Adopt an Eagle Nest Program's
website](http://dnr.wi.gov/org/land/er/support/aen.htm).

::: divimage
[![art](images/71616-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix049.html#a71616-0)

PHOTO: Gregory K. Scott Photo Researchers, Inc.

The wings of a bald eagle span 7 feet.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71616-1.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix049.html#a71616-1)

Gregory K. Scott Photo Researchers, Inc.

A bald eagle's feet, eyes and large bill are yellow.
:::

::: divimage
[![art](images/71616-2.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix049.html#a71616-2)

Gregory K. Scott Photo Researchers, Inc.

These days, Sauk-Praire is so alive with bald eagles that it's hard to
believe they were ever threatened by extinction.
:::
:::

[]{#chapter058.html}

::: body
# [Four-Wheel Fun](#toc.html#chap-58) {.chapter-title}

**December/January 1991**

**SHOP SHORT**

TWO -WHEELERS DON'T HAVE TO be the only game in town. This isn't news to
those who spent their fun-filled youth pumping the daylights out of a
pipe-and-wheel contraption that was called an "Irish Mail." Well, here's
a modern version of that pump scooter, and it can be built with
electrical metallic tubing (EMT) and some odds and ends.

The necessary tools include a small welder and two different tubing
benders (to handle 1/2" and 1" EMT), as well as a hacksaw, an electric
drill with bits, a screwdriver, a round file, a measuring tape, a pipe
wrench, and a coping saw. If you're purchasing new electrical conduit
(in 10 lengths), you'll need two complete 1" sections, one 3/4" piece,
and three 1/2" lengths to handle most of the job. Also required are an
additional 2' of the 1/2" size and an 8" length of 1 1/4" tubing. The
two-piece seat can be cut from a single 20" X 28" slab of plywood.

The chassis is made from two 58" lengths of 1" conduit which are bent to
the same contour, then joined to form a sort of paddle shape. To curve
these sections properly, choose one and-starting at either end measure
off 4". Make a 90° bend at that point, which should take up about 10".

### Building the "Irish Mail" {.level3}

Mark off 5" more, start a 45° arc (this one uses up 5"), leave an 8"
straight section, form the final 45° curve, and then determine the
length of the remaining leg (it should be about 21").

Once you've curved a pair of the tubular side rails, join them by
temporarily placing your 1 1/2" pipe coupling between the parallel front
tubes as a spacer, then welding the butted rear tips to each other. Use
a scrap of 1"-diameter mechanical tubing (or filed-down 3/4" pipe)
inside both parts to serve as a bridge.

The rear axle housings are welded to the chassis next, and these should
be positioned so they intersect the right-angle bends at midpoint and
are equally divided by the joint. A 2 1/2" section of 1/2" conduit holds
each one to the frame at the inner ends, but since the goal is to mount
the housings true for proper wheel alignment and camber, these stubs may
have to be made slightly longer or shorter to suit your individual
chassis.

The rest of the frame components are made from 1/2" EMT, which can be
fine-trimmed as necessary. A 20" cross-member fastens between the side
rails at a point 10 1/2" in front of the butt joint at the rear. Then
two 90° pieces-one 9" and the other 24" in total length-are similarly
arranged to help support the plywood seat.

**A one-wheel brake is all that's needed for this simple "pump about."
All the cart's wheels can be fabricated from**\
**discarded bike rims.**

To form the seat-back frame, bend both a 30 1/2" and a 35" conduit
section into the shapes indicated, then weld the wider piece to the
upper surface of the frame rails (1" forward of the crossmember) at an
angle of 60°. The narrow hoop mounts atop that at an 85° bias to the
chassis. Then the seatback strut, along with the 4 1/2" rear support, is
fastened in place to lock the axle housings to the seat structure.

At this point, complete the steering hub and pump handle. Both of these
parts have to be adjustable, so they're designed to slide within the
parallel front frame rails as necessary, and can be held in place with
hose clamps. The hub is simply the 1 1/2" pipe coupling welded to each
half of a longitudinally split section of 11/4," EMT, then capped at
each end with 1 1/2" to 3/4" pipe bushings. The threads within the
center hole in each reducer must be filed out if it's to accept the
shank of a 3/4" nipple.

The handle is nothing more than a section of 1" conduit equipped with
3/4" X 14" upper grip bar and a 1" X 7" pivot shaft-at the lower
end-made from a scrap of mechanical tubing (this piece can be replaced
with a length of 4 3/4," pipe if you don't mind filing its outer surface
a bit). A 3/16" X 1 1/2" X 7" hunk of flat metal welded perpendicularly
to the midpoint of the pinion functions as the drive lever, and the 1"
shaft rides inside a pair of 1" X 2 1/4," EMT stubs. These stubs are
clipped to the chassis rails with half sections of 1 Y" conduit and hose
clamps.

A buttress front axle allows easy foot steering, and it's made by
welding a 3" piece of 1/2" EMT, then a 2 1/2" washer and3/4" X 3 3/4"
pipe nipple combination to the center of, and perpendicular to, the 1" X
30" conduit axle. A 27" length of 1/4," reinforcing rod trusses the
assembly, and two angle iron sections, fastened to the ends of the
housing and tilted toward the rider, form modest footrests. The axle
itself is merely a 40" stretch of 3/4" conduit run through the housing.
The front wheel hubs ride on the shaft and are held in place with 1/4"
bolts pinned through the tube's ends.

To attach the front assembly to the steering hub, just slip the 3/4"
pipe center pivot through the two bushings in the coupling and lock it
in place with a large washer and 3/4" pipe cap.

The drive and brake mechanisms also work on a sleeve-within-a-sleeve
principle. The 3/4" X 17 1/2" drive axle shaft utilizes a 3/16'' X 1
1/2" X 5" flat metal crank throw (a 2 1/2" washer, welded in place 1"
from that bar, makes a good walk stop). The braked (right side) wheel is
fastened to a 3/4" shaft that houses-and is bolted to-a 1/2" X 17 1/2"
pipe, which is then connected to a 5 1/2" pulley. The right axle shaft
uses an anti-slide washer, as does the drive axle, and it's carried
inside the axle housing as well.

A one-wheel brake is all that's needed for this simple "pump-about," and
that can be worked out by tacking a 1" X 9" EMT housing to the upper
part of the chassis just behind the crossmember. Two more conduit
sections, welded at a right angle, provide a brake handle and shaft.
Once this control is slipped into place and a small spacer and stop are
installed, a 27" length of strapping band is fastened between the brake
shaft and crossmember, with the pulley nestled in the loop created. In
practice, this arrangement works reasonably well, since a good deal of
tension can be drawn on the strap through the mechanical advantage of
the small pivot. But the system performs even better if the pulley
groove itself is covered with a steel band, and the inner side of the
steel loop is then faced with a strip of "grabby" rubber matting to act
as a brake shoe.

All the cart's wheels can be fabricated from EMT scraps and discarded
bike rims, since regular spoked wheels probably couldn't stand up to the
side thrusts placed upon them by a "four-footer." To mak\\e sturdy
units, use 1" X 4" conduit hubs, centered within the rims. For each one,
cut five 1/2" spokes to length (from 7" to 7 1/8 long, depending on the
rim). Lay the rim on a slab of plywood, mark its circumference, and then
bore a hub-holding hole dead center. By using spacer blocks to lift the
rim and spokes to the hub's midlevel, you can tack all of your parts in
place first and can finish welding them when you're satisfied with the
assembly.

As soon as the wheels are bolted on the axle shafts (short lengths of
vacuum-cleaner hose make nice grease covers to fit over the axles
between the hubs and the housings), you can complete the pumper by
fastening the seat boards and the connecting rod in place. To keep the
driving force aligned along the axis of the cart, the 1/2" X 29 1/2" rod
has a small offset in it about 4" from the crank (rear) end. A 1"-long
piece of 1/2" conduit welded to the end of the connecting rod serves as
a wrist sleeve through which the driving mechanism can be bolted to the
crank throw. At the front end of the rod, a 1/2" nut allows for the
installation (and adjustment) of an eyebolt, or-if you have expensive
tastes-a Heim joint.

With everything welded, bolted, and screwed in position, you can paint
your chariot. The final step can be tricky: trying to keep the children
off this four-wheeler until the paint dries!

::: divimage
[![art](images/71618-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix050.html#a71618-0)
:::
:::

[]{#chapter059.html}

::: body
# [Lessons Of Cutting Wood](#toc.html#chap-59) {.chapter-title}

**Read this narrative about how a man learned about cutting wood, and
the pains he felt along the way from his back to his pocketbook.**

**By Mike Drummond**

**December 1991/January 1992**

Scrap 2-by-4s were our main fuel the first year we had a woodstove -
square wood being easy to stack and carry. I know it isn't proper fuel
for a woodstove, but it did keep us warm.

When all the construction scraps were gone, I decided to do the logical
thing and buy a chain saw to take advantage of the "free" firewood
growing on our property. (When I say "buy a chain saw," I really mean I
went to Sears for a chain saw and came out with a brand-new Craftsman
20", a scabbard to protect the chain on the saw, an electric saw
sharpener, heavy gloves, orange hard hat, safety goggles, earplugs, fuel
and a fuel can, two kinds of oil, and this heavy apron/chaps thing to
protect my legs.)

Soon after, I mounted my sawhorse and was ready to joust with the trees
in my quest for the lost cord. As a novice, I only picked on fallen
trees. I figured it was pretty hard to get squashed by something that's
already lying on the ground. Before long, I was surrounded by stack
after stack of neatly sawn 18 inch logs.

At the end of the day, when my saw and I were both out of gas, one of my
neighbors came over to see what all the noise was about. When he saw my
woodpile, he smirked.

"That's no way to stack wood," he laughed, giving the nearest pile a
nudge with his boot. As if proving the domino effect, the first pile of
logs toppled, hitting the second pile, and on and on, leaving me before
long with only the realization that I own very little level land.

"You need crisscross cribbing on the ends for stability," he said. "Take
a look at one of my piles next time you drive by."

As I rounded up my stray logs I thought about kicking his pile over, but
quickly reconsidered. After all, he had been on the rational side (my
side) during local road association negotiations. And I certainly didn't
want to find out where a rural log-kicking feud might lead. So I
inspected his arrow-straight rows of precisely stacked oak. I nudged the
pile; it felt like it was nailed together.

Crisscross cribbing is hard to stack without splitting the logs-they
keep rolling away. So it was back to the Agway for a maul. A vicious
circle swirled in my brain: I wanted dry firewood. I had green, wet
logs. Split wood dries faster than whole logs. But green wood is harder
to split than dry wood, which, if I had, I wouldn't need to split.

My wrists and lower back gave out about the time the blisters on my
palms broke, which was right after I split my last cribbing log. Three
days and some massage therapy later, I regained the use of my back and
hands. With a stiff finger, I dialed up my neighborhood expert to keep
him current on the firewood situation.

"Get yourself a hydraulic splitter, son," he drawled. "I'd lend you
mine, but you know how it is with lending tools to neighbors." Yes, I
knew.

Seeing as I had 10 times more wood to split and no energetic teenage son
to send out there to do it, I headed out in search of a log splitter.

For the cost of a dozen cords of seasoned oak-delivered, split and
stacked at my doorstep-I could purchase a lightweight log splitter. The
salesman assured me that it would last a lifetime, which gave either me
or the splitter at least a 10-year life span because my family only
burns about a cord a year. He wanted me to consider a small tractor to
haul the splitter to job sites on my property, and a trailer to haul the
finished product back to my house. I would need to pay extra for
warranties, insurance on everything and maintenance agreements because
I'm not mechanically inclined. Oh, and I'd need a new \$50 trailer-hitch
assembly for my truck to haul all the new toys home, where I knew I'd
have to spend several weekends building a new storage shed to house all
this laborsaving stuff. I made a mental note to leave room in the new
shed for the Rototiller I needed for my garden. Suddenly, firewood
preparation was going to cost me more than my entire college education.
Dazed and babbling, I begged the salesman for a moment alone with my
checkbook.

Well, following much soul-searching and gnashing of teeth, I did it. I
wrote him a check for a whopping \$50.

Then I swung by the local rental yard and towed home a rented log
splitter on my brand new trailer hitch.

::: divimage
[![art](images/71620-0.jpg){height="150"}](#appendix051.html#a71620-0)

ILLUSTRATION BY DAVID COULSON

With a nudge, his pile of chopped wood rolled down the hill. He would
learn to stack it differently.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix001.html}

::: body
![art](images/71352-0.jpg)

![art](images/71352-1.jpg)

![art](images/71352-2.jpg)

![art](images/71352-3.jpg)

![art](images/71352-4.jpg)

![art](images/71352-5.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix002.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71354-0.jpg)

Deborah Mar shall (left) with fellow Fiddle headers Susan Brook, Nancy
DeCherney, and John DeCherney.
:::

![art](images/71354-1.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix003.html}

::: body
![art](images/71356-0.jpg)

![art](images/71356-1.jpg)

![art](images/71356-2.jpg)

![art](images/71356-3.jpg)

![art](images/71356-4.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix004.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71358-0.jpg)

Fleas can jump (top) off your cat and onto anything even you. Their tiny
eggs(above) can hide anywhere. A tick (left) dining al fresco on fido
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71358-1.jpg)

Emily Miller, a longtime animal care specialist at Pet Patrol in New
York State, has spent most of her life in very rural Vermont with
several cats and two St. Bernards. She is currently the mother of a
marmalade tabby Sam, and is in search of the perfect Australian
Shepherd.
:::

![art](images/71358-2.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix005.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71360-0.jpg)

Author Sarlin celebrates a way of cooking that has fallen too far out of
fashion
:::

![art](images/71360-1.jpg)

![art](images/71360-2.jpg)

![art](images/71360-3.jpg)

![art](images/71360-4.jpg)

![art](images/71360-5.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix006.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71362-0.jpg)

High- and low- pressure systems
:::

![art](images/71362-1.jpg)

![art](images/71362-2.jpg)

![art](images/71362-3.jpg)

![art](images/71362-4.jpg)

![art](images/71362-5.jpg)

![art](images/71362-6.jpg)

![art](images/71362-7.jpg)

![art](images/71362-8.jpg)

![art](images/71362-9.jpg)

![art](images/71362-10.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix007.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71364-0.jpg)

The lodge's solar array can see the Selway through 10 sunless days.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71364-1.jpg)

Sunelco's Dan Brandborg checks the battery power of the Selway Lodge.
The 16 batteries yield 1400 amp-hours of storage
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71364-2.jpg)

A bird's-eye view: The Selway Lodge (hero houses, a dorm, and many
cabins) serves as a summer hunting and fishing retreat
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71364-3.jpg)

""I read two books on PV, and in two years, I knew more than most people
in the industry."" Sunelco's Dan Brandborg.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix008.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71366-0.jpg)

Jay and Deanna Kawatski. Right: The Kawatski homestead near Bob Quinn
Lake, British Columbia.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71366-1.jpg)

Deanna (above) cooks for the family on a cast-iron stove while Jay (top)
prepares a rabbit hide for tanning. Son Ben never lacks transactions in
the workshop.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71366-2.jpg)

The Kawatski's root cellar (above) overflows with carrots, potatoes, and
turnips. Jay carries grain bundles (top) tied to the handle of his
shovel.
:::

![art](images/71366-3.jpg)

![art](images/71366-4.jpg)

![art](images/71366-5.jpg)

![art](images/71366-6.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix009.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71368-0.jpg)

CLEMENS KALISCHER

Robyn Van En surveys the bounty of her CSA's labor. Her dog, Bubbles,
seems less interested.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71368-1.jpg)

CLEMENS KALISCHER

CSA members harvest carrots as part of their duties.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71368-2.jpg)

CLEMENS KALISCHER

Shareholders receive organic produce, as much as seven pounds each week,
for supermarket prices.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix010.html}

::: body
![art](images/71370-0.jpg)

![art](images/71370-1.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix011.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71372-0.jpg)

Back the work with a piece of scrap to prevent the wood from tearing put
when the drill comes through.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71372-1.jpg)

To follow the line when sawing, be sure to watch the blade, not the
notch in front of the base plate.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix012.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71374-0.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION: MONICA FORRESTALL

What can a root cellar do for your? It can give you fresh endive in
December; savory Chinese cabbage in January; juicy apples in February;
crisp carrots in March; and sturdy potatoes in April.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71374-1.jpg)

PHOTO: MICHAEL BUBEL

Co-author Nancy Bubel, cellar-bound with her garden's bounty
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71374-2.jpg)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS STAFF

If you can mantain between 32 and 40 degrees Fahrenheit, you have an
excellent storage place.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71374-3.jpg)

KEITH HEBERLING

These root cellar plans should get you started on your way to year-round
vegetable storage.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71374-4.jpg)

KEITH HEBERLING

Space between the shelves and walls allows fresh air to circulate around
the produce, thus preventing the produce from getting moldy.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71374-5.jpg)

KEITH HEBERLING
:::
:::

[]{#appendix013.html}

::: body
![art](images/71376-0.jpg)

![art](images/71376-1.jpg)

![art](images/71376-2.jpg)

![art](images/71376-3.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix014.html}

::: body
![art](images/71378-0.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix015.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/77422-0.jpg)

Turn, turn, turn: The more air it gets, the quicker it cooks.
:::

![art](images/77422-1.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix016.html}

::: body
![art](images/77424-0.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix017.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71382-0.jpg)

PHOTO: LES DAVENPORT

Gary Davenport, nephew of the author, holds a giants puffball (Calvatia
gigantea), which sometimes grows to diamaters larger than a basketball
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-1.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

Pear-shaped puffballs (*Lycoperdon pyriforme*) are approximately 1 inch
in diameter and grow in clusters on decaying wood.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-2.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

The fried-chicken mushroom (*Lyophyllum decastes*): Enjoy harvesting it,
but beware of look-alikes.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-3.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

The hen of the woods (*Grifola frondosa*) often grows In the some
location year after year.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-4.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

The chicken mushroom (*Laetiporus sulphurous*) is one of the most prized
among veteran mushroomers.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-5.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

The oyster mushroom (*Pleurotus ostreatus*) is "choice" for eating. It
grows from deciduous trees.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-6.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

These aging honey mushrooms (*Armillariella mellea*) are great late-year
replacements for the early-spring morel.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-7.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

Believe It or not, even this jelly leaf fungus (*Tremella foliacea*) is
edible.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-8.jpg)

LES DAVENPORT

Some coral fungus family members are edible; others cause gastric upset.
Consult a field guide before you forage.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-9.jpg)

The turkey-tail mushroom (*Trametes versicolor*) is also a member of the
polypore family. Mind you, it's nonedible.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71382-10.jpg)

Some oyster mushrooms grow from a stublike stalk when coming up out of
old, decaying wood.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix018.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71384-0.jpg)

PHOTO: FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71384-1.jpg)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71384-2.jpg)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71384-3.jpg)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71384-4.jpg)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71384-5.jpg)

FILE ART
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71384-6.jpg)

FILE ART
:::
:::

[]{#appendix019.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71388-0.jpg)

HOLLY FARMS

Maggie, of Greene County, NY, satisfying her canine urge for animal
hide.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71388-1.jpg)

PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY NATIONAL DOG REGISTRY

Sparky undergoes a painless tattoing process that will identify him for
life.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix020.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71390-0.jpg)

PHOTO: GEORGIA O'BRIEN

A collection of supplies for making fall wreaths.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-1.jpg)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Grapevine
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-2.jpg)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Sphagnum Moss
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-3.jpg)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Yarrow
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-4.jpg)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Teasel
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-5.jpg)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Queen Anne's Lace
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-6.jpg)

FILE ILLUSTRATION

Green Millet
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-7.jpg)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

Place foraged flowers gently into a tin of silica gel to dry.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-8.jpg)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

The vines will be supple and manageable if soaked overnight.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71390-9.jpg)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

The finished product: A natural vine wreath with milkweed flowers.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix021.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71392-0.jpg)

DEBBE SHARPE

Mike Reynolds' Earthship. The house is literally carved out of the
hillside.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71392-1.jpg)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

Tires are laid in courses, like bricks. Cans are used for interior walls
as well as exterior construction.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71392-2.jpg)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

By leaving the south side of the Earthships exposed to the sun, Mike
Reynolds' tire houses are heated almost entirely by passive solar
heating combined with the principles of mass.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71392-3.jpg)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

Steel-belted walls: A closeup of the tire courses.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71392-4.jpg)

DEBBIE SHARPE

Archetecture students as well as future Earthship owners can get
hands-on training, as Mike Reynolds (with beard) leads a seminar on
building an Earthship.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71392-5.jpg)

CHRISTINE SIMPSON

Archetecture students as well as future Earthship owners can get
hands-on training, as Mike Reynolds (with beard) leads a seminar on
building an Earthship.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix022.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71394-0.jpg)

PHOTO: CLYDE H. SMITH

Building stone walls is gratifying, and the product will last into
future generations.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-1.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

A plumb line gets you started with even courses when building on uneven
ground (dashed line shows ground level).
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-2.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Where to find your stones.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-3.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tools for wall building.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-4.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

More tools for wall building.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-5.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

An example of a good stone wall and one with adjecent joints called
"runs."
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-6.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tie stones literally keep a wall tied together from front to back.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-7.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tie stones are especially important at corners. They are shown here
shaded.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-8.jpg)

DOUGLAS MERRILEES AND RALPH SCOTT

Tie stones are shown here overlapping in the courses.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71394-9.jpg)

CLYDE H. SMITH

Come fire, hail or high water, a properly built stone wall will be there
for your great-grandkids to remember you by.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix023.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71396-0.jpg)

PHOTO: STEVEN MARK NEEDHAM/ENVISION

As many opportunities as there are to eat apple pie, there are an equal
number of variations. Here, for instance, Dutch Apple Pie.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71396-1.jpg)

STARK BRO'S NURSERIES, MO.

These pies are beautiful and delicious too!
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71396-2.jpg)

JAMES VILES/SUPERSTOCK

The perfect pie crust is simple with only a handful of ingredients.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix024.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71398-0.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION: JIM DEIGAN

The Cherry Tree Buck grew a cherry tree from between its antlers.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71398-1.jpg)

JIM DEIGAN

The cherries from the tree had small sets of antlers inside.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix025.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71400-0.jpg)

PHOTO: DAVID CAVAGNARO

Sandy Langhorst, of Santa Rosa, California, prepares her autumn garden
with a dried-leaf mulch.
:::

![art](images/71400-1.jpg)

![art](images/71400-2.jpg)

![art](images/71400-3.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix026.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71402-0.jpg)

File Art
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71402-1.jpg)

File Art
:::
:::

[]{#appendix027.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71406-0.jpg)

PHOTO: ISTOCKPHOTO/MONKEYBUSINESSIMAGES

Fireplaces are cozy, but they can allow heat to escape. Follow these
tips to save energy this winter.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix028.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71408-0.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION: JOSE DIAZ

The third arm of this portable workbench is collapsible and folds up
like a TV tray for easy storage.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71408-1.jpg)

JOSE DIAZ

The two halves of the top of the bench close together tightly like a
vise and also serve as compartments for tools and equipment.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71408-2.jpg)

CHRIS FULLER

This diagram shows the materials needed to construct this portable
workbench.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix029.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71410-0.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION: MONICA FORRESTALL

Cherry pits have three times the heating capacity of pebbles.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71410-1.jpg)

MONICA FORRESTALL

You'll need about 15 pies' worth of pits to make a single pillow.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71410-2.jpg)

MONICA FORRESTALL

Use a hefty fabric like denim to make your pillow.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71410-3.jpg)

MONICA FORRESTALL

You can warm your pillow over a woodstove before bed.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71410-4.jpg)

MONICA FORRESTALL

Your feet (and the rest of you) will stay toasty warm on chilly nights.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix030.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/77426-0.jpg)

PHOTO: NICKI KLEIN PARSONS

Styrofoam packing peanuts and old bedsheets can make nice, big puffy
pillows for everyday use.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix031.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/77428-0.jpg)

PHOTO: DAVID COULSON

Nothing can persuade a farmer to get rid of his old tractor like the
thought of a brand new tractor.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix032.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71580-0.jpg)

PHOTO: DENNIS SLODYSKO

This reader recommends a cheap, easy way to keep your windshield cleaner
than ever.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71580-1.jpg)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Add bird feeders on top of ant hills to not only attract more wildlife
to your yard but also help get rid of the pests!
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71580-2.jpg)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Get rid of fleas --- and celebrate --- with a bonfire.\
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71580-3.jpg)

SHARON L. CARSON

A reader turns her unwanted junk mail into a way to start her seeds for
the growing season.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix033.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71584-0.jpg)

PHOTO: TAB BOOKS

You can execute these DIY toy box plans all by yourself.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71584-1.jpg)

TAB BOOKS

Use these diagrams with our toy chest plans to make the perfect place
for your children to put their toys.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71584-2.jpg)

TAB BOOKS

The materials needed to build a toy box with our plans.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71584-3.jpg)

TAB BOOKS

The toy box plans in this article were exerpted from this book.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix034.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71586-0.jpg)

PHOTO: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

The soup masters of Nub's Nob (from left); Betty Spierling and Pauline
Steele stir up a pot of hearty fare.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix035.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71588-0.jpg)

PHOTO: FLICKR/RANDALLVANGURCHOM

A horse reaches for a fresh bite of grass under a layer of winter snow.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix036.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71590-0.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Teach yourself to play the fiddle, and you can enjoy beautiful music
forever!
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71590-1.jpg)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS
:::
:::

[]{#appendix037.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71592-0.jpg)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Uncle Billy shows off one of his famous salt-cured hams.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71592-1.jpg)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Three wooden tiers ring the smokehosue rafters. The top tier is for new
meat.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71592-2.jpg)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Uncle Billy uses this vintage sliver that "slices meat so thin you can
read through it."
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71592-3.jpg)

PHOTO BY JOEL BOURNE

Uncle Billy's salt table.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix038.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71594-0.jpg)

PHOTO: iSTOCK/JORGEANTONIO

Picket fences and sidewalk borders are ideal locations for varying the
color arrangement of old roses and purple sage (*Salvia officinalis*).
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71594-1.jpg)

iSTOCK PHOTO/ JAKECZ

Tawny daylilies (*Hemerocallis fulva*) in the early settler's cottage
garden.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71594-2.jpg)

iSTOCK/DEETONE

A cottage garden with a beautiful border of heirloom roses, daylilies
and other colorful blooms.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71594-3.jpg)

iSTOCK PHOTO/WINGMAR

Siberian iris (*Iris sibirica*) in the ecclectic garden, combining
heirloom and hybrid varieties.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71594-4.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

A child's arbor can be a fun, and stunning, addition to your heirloom
garden.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71594-5.jpg)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

This quiggly fence follows a design similar to one traditionally built
in early settler's cottage gardens.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix039.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71596-0.jpg)

PHOTO: ISTOCKPHOTO/SVLUMAGRAPHICA

Be sure to take safety precautions when sharpening and using an axe.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix040.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71598-0.jpg)

PHOTO: DAVID CAVAGNARO

Cold-weather mulching protects perennials in much the same way as a
heavy blanket of snow insulates the ground in winter.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix041.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71600-0.jpg)

PHOTO: GEORGIA O'BRIEN

A close-up of a completed section of holiday garland.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71600-1.jpg)

GEORGIA O'BRIEN

Tying the bundled drieds onto the base, spacing out the bunches before
gluing and fastening the goodies in place with a glue gun.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix042.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71602-0.jpg)

MOTHER EARTH NEWS editors

Spices, foraged plants and essential oils mixed into potpourri and
wrapped in sachets make unique, homemade Christmas gifts.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix043.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71604-0.jpg)

PHOTO: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Living Christmas trees are not only beautiful while decorating your
house, but you can replant your tree for year-round enjoyment.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix044.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71606-0.jpg)

PHOTO: MIRANDA PENN TURIN

Eloise, 4, takes recycling into her own hands with Holgate's Recycling
Truck.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix045.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71608-0.jpg)

PHOTO: MOTHER EARTH NEWS EDITORS

Candles create the perfect ambiance for the holiday season. This year,
make your own holiday candles out of meat scraps.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix046.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71610-0.jpg)

PHOTO: IMAGINE MEDIA SERVICES

The Whifield Advantage II-T freestanding stove, from Pyre Industries
(Burlington, WA) emits just 1.3 g/hr at 80 percent efficiency.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71610-1.jpg)

IMAGINE MEDIA SERVICES

Left: The Destiny pellet stove, from Horizon Research, Inc. Right: The
catalytic Defiant Encore, from Vermont Castings (Randolph, VT).
:::
:::

[]{#appendix047.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71612-0.jpg)

PHOTO: ISTOCKPHOTO/ANGELERA

A woodstove fire can keep you and your family warm and cozy when it's
cold outside.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71612-1.jpg)

IMAGINE MEDIA SERVICES

The Whitfield Renaissance Pellet Stove by Pyre industries emits only .4
g/hr and operates of 82 percent efficiency.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix048.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71614-0.jpg)

PHOTO: STEVEN MARK NEEDHAM/ENVISION

Eggplant wrapped in foil is wonderful when you add basil and tomato
slices.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix049.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71616-0.jpg)

PHOTO: Gregory K. Scott Photo Researchers, Inc.

The wings of a bald eagle span 7 feet.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71616-1.jpg)

Gregory K. Scott Photo Researchers, Inc.

A bald eagle's feet, eyes and large bill are yellow.
:::

::: divimage
![art](images/71616-2.jpg)

Gregory K. Scott Photo Researchers, Inc.

These days, Sauk-Praire is so alive with bald eagles that it's hard to
believe they were ever threatened by extinction.
:::
:::

[]{#appendix050.html}

::: body
![art](images/71618-0.jpg)
:::

[]{#appendix051.html}

::: body
::: divimage
![art](images/71620-0.jpg)

ILLUSTRATION BY DAVID COULSON

With a nudge, his pile of chopped wood rolled down the hill. He would
learn to stack it differently.
:::
:::
